Everybody.
Uh, I'm Liz.
And, um, and you will have read my written,
our written submission from Wellington Tens Trust in Palm
and North Maori Reserves.
Uh, I know that someone has said that, um, is here,
but I don't think he is.
He has asked me to apologize.
Uh, he has been caught up in other business in Topo,
so I'm going to be talking for both of us.
And I wanna talk personally about Wellington
and the Hut Valley, which is the,
and the first thing I want to say
is the Fast Track legislation is following the path
of earlier legislative reforms.
The trust in Wellington
and the Hut Valley have UA in the AWA
and managed Maori land through Tu
Maori Land Act.
We have been advisors to the Crown
and local government since 1839.
This legislation excludes us.
This is not helpful to developers
or the hapu of Nu
because the people signing the treaty
and the free trade agreement with the New Zealand company,
were not technically iwi,
but hapu, the iwi function
for the Hapu of Ellington reside in the
traditional lands in Tara.
The Hapu have the knowledge
and understanding of our environment
in every sense of the word.
By excluding aua, you are leaving out the riches we have
and to provide to the process for consenting.
We support development and always have.
We are landowners and property owners,
and maywell at some point need fast track too.
Mm-hmm. We are rich in resources and knowledge
and history of our and lived here
maintaining continuously.
We understand in depth the challenges.
We seek to have our role as man
recognized in this legislation.
We have staff trained as hearing commissioners.
We are involved in the Federation of Maori authorities,
but most importantly,
we under understand our responsibilities as man,
man and are accessible
and are well known throughout the three cities.
To conclude my oral submission,
and I wanna leave enough time for some questions
in this short space of time, I want to give to you.
The Ari along with
uni, did the deal with the New Zealand company
that set the strategy for, and its colonization.
And they also, of course, signed in Wellington Harbor
on the 29th of April, 1840.
And so the goes like this
in English after I have gone be good to my Maori people
and my European people, let the thunder
of your voice reach me in the spirit land to
Wadi in 1842 on his deathbed,
provided that to us.
We have lived by that and followed it ever since.
And so we are hoping that the change
that we are seeking, which is to recognize
over 2000 a trust throughout this country
who are the real for the land, for the water,
for the air, and of course for people,
Gilda. Thank you,
Liz. Look, we've got time for a couple
of questions and we'll start with Celia Wade Brown
Kia, Elia, Liz.
Um, and thank you for those very good points about the
ah, Fen Trust.
Um, I was interested to see whether you, you,
this bill has been very much advertised
as a grocery competition bill,
but would you say it goes a lot further in giving
ministerial direction to every project under the fast track?
Potentially Elia, I think
that's an absolute reality.
And, and, and I certainly under understand that,
but really the first thing,
the first message I wanna get across is
indigenous people across the world are showing
that they can assist in ensuring that
the balance between our environmental outcomes, our Tik,
our culture and development
all can sit side by side.
And we have huge experience in doing that.
And I wanted the select committee to understand
that we're a plus, not a minus.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll move to Lan for her question.
Tina, Liz, thank you so much for your submission
and for being here this morning.
My question was around, um, something quite specific
because your, your submission touches on the broader aspects
of, you know, you feeling like this bill breaches
partnership under Titi,
but then I wanted to pick up specifically,
it's on page four of your submission.
You talk about the fragmentation of environmental oversight
and you mentioned the example where
this amendment is now introducing, uh,
not just approvals at the final stage of a project decision,
but staged approvals throughout.
And you use the example of waterways as,
as an example of why it would be of such concern that
a comprehensive decision wouldn't just be made at the end,
but actually before they've actually looked at the entirety
of the impacts, say cumulative impacts.
Can you give us some examples of
what your concerns are there?
Well, yes I can.
And what I wanted to, to,
and thank you Lan, um, is the, um,
the problem that we have, particularly with freshwater
of over allocation
and when things are done in a piecemeal way.
And the first, you know, first
and first served model that has been in, in play
for nearly 200 years, it's excluded some, it's,
it's in Wellington particularly has some really
strong examples.
And I know that in the current case
before the high court examples have been identified.
And so, um, clearly
we need, and it goes back to having good balance
and good understanding
and knowledge of our environment,
of our, our, of our Moana
and the impacts that all of this has.
If we are not getting that comprehensive
and careful thought,
and I will reiterate, we are not against
the opportunity to develop.
In fact, you know, going back to 1991
with the first RMA legislation was very clear.
It was to assist
and ensure that environmental
impacts are balanced with economic outcomes,
with cultural outcomes, and with social outcomes.
And so, uh, you, you know, this is I believe taking it
a step way too fast.
Way too far, not fast but far.
Look, thank you very much, Liz.
We have met time this morning.
We thank you for your time
and your insightful, uh, submission. So thank you.
Thanks Catherine.
So we will now move on to Santana Minerals.
We have an apology at the moment from, uh, three 50 roa.
Um, so we will move on
to our next submitter Santana Minerals who, uh,
will be coming through shortly
and I can see Damien, you are there.
Hello. Hello. Good morning.
Look, you've got 10 minutes with us this morning.
We will hand it over to you if you are opening remarks
and then open up for questions.
Great. Uh, so thanks to the committee
for allowing the opportunity to speak today on behalf of
Nui Gold, uh,
regarding our submission on the Fast Track Approvals
Amendment Bill, uh, my name's Damien Spring.
I'm the Chief Executive Officer of Santana Minerals Limited.
Uh, Santana is the parent company of Nu Gold,
which will operate the Bendigo Fer Gold Project
and is a New Zealand company.
Nu Gold, uh,
submitted a substantive application under the Fast Track
Approvals Act at the end of October.
Through preparing our application
and closely following the experience of other projects,
we have identified several aspects of the Fast Track process
that do not appear to be operating
as we believe Parliament originally intended.
Mat Gold is strongly supportive of the purpose
and intent behind the fast track process,
particularly its goal of accelerating projects
that deliver significant regional and national benefits.
We also support the Bill's aim in the proposed amendments
to ensure the process is both operationally
and procedurally efficient.
We welcome the proposed amendments in the bill
that are designed to speed up the process, such as changes
to consultation requirements, structured completeness,
checks, invitations for comments,
decision timeframes, and appeal rights.
These changes will go a long way towards addressing the
delays currently affecting eligible projects
and we strongly support them.
However, further pragmatic amendments need to be made
to the bill to ensure the purpose
of the Fast Track Approvals Act is fully realized and na
and that nationally and regionally significant projects are
streamlined rather than delayed.
I'll, uh, briefly address the amendments required
to the bill, which are set out in full in our submission
In regards to section 30.
Uh, while not an issue for our project, we're aware
of applicants who have experienced significant difficulty
and barriers in obtaining Section 30 approvals from councils
as applications cannot be lodged until section 30, uh,
approvals are given as currently drafted.
Section 30 is delaying the delivery of projects.
We support the 10 working day timeframe
for council response council's response proposing the bill,
but suggest that section 30 is further amend, amended so
that it operates to signal potential overlaps
with existing consents
and not block substandard applications from being lodged
and provide panels with the ability
to evaluate an applicant's proposed solutions
to address overlap with s as part of their decision making
and impose conditions to secure this outcome if necessary.
Regards to Schedule two in scope, we support the amendments
that builder introduced processes
for amending Schedule two project descriptions
to help avoid delays related to project scope.
After applications are lodged, we recommend
that the following further amendments be included.
To reduce technical setbacks, amend the, uh,
project descriptions, schedule two to clarify
that is intended as a general description
and it is not exhaustive.
And update the pro, uh, definit, uh, sorry,
update the definition of project in section two
to include a reference to the referral application.
These changes would help ensure that technical issues
around project scope do not necessarily delay
or prevent the progress of eligible projects.
In terms of what invited comments
to achieve achieve the purpose of the fast check process,
the opportunity for public comment was
always intended to be limited.
It is important that any additional invitations
for comment are made only where the panel cons
considers some necessary to assist with decision making
and that such invitations are targeted, relevant
and directly material to the decision at hand.
Uh, in terms of bottom lines, we to ensure that the goal
of facilitating projects with significant national
and regional benefits is achieved.
We believe it's important that Section 85
provides certainty and clarity.
Specifically clearer wording should be included to confirm
that an applicant's inability to meet a bottom line
or planning document requirement should not on its own
or primarily be fatal to the application
where the positive impact of the project is outweighed
by significant national or regional benefits.
And the scope of the approvals.
The fast track process is intended to be a one stop shop
where all approvals required
for a project can be obtained at once.
We have been consistent in submitting on, on the,
on these points to enable to obtain the full suite
of approvals required large scale
and complex mineral extraction projects approvals under the
Overseas Investment Act 2005.
The Public Works Act 1981 should also be able
to proceed as part of this process.
This should, this would reduce duplication
and delay for nationally significant mineral
extraction processes.
Large scale and complex mineral extraction projects often
require approvals under this legislation.
As projects often located near or on
or adjacent to sensitive land,
the significant capital injection needed for the development
and large startup of large scale mineral extraction often
requires foreign investment.
Large scale mineral extraction often requires a stopping
of roads in many cases these are historic
uninformed paper roads.
So we strongly support the intention to mend the process
that eligible projects, along
with their associated benefits can be delivered
as efficiently as possible.
The additional targeted amendments we have outlined in our
submission are practical solutions to aspects of the process
that are currently undermining the purpose of the act
and causing delays to project delivery.
I'm happy to take questions from the committee. Thank you.
Thank you, Jamie. We'll start with Rachel Brooking.
Thanks Dam,
Everyone. Yeah,
we've got a little bit of feedback there.
Maybe just while you sort that out Rachel,
we'll just move to Lam.
Kda. Can you hear me? Can?
Awesome. Thanks so much for your submission, Damien.
Um, we heard earlier in hearings on the first day last week
from the panel conveners that they were really concerned
that the changes proposed in this bill
that you are supporting, um, that the quality of decisions
that come about
because of this will be very vulnerable to appeal
and judicial review
and they were really concerned about the robustness
of those decisions.
Are you concerned for your own projects
and fast track about not only that potential for
judicial review and appeal,
but even at a more community level, the social license
to actually operate in your community?
Um, if these changes were to go
through, can you comment on that?
Uh, I do do judicial reviews a bit
outside my, uh, expertise.
Um, I guess any delay to, uh,
the project would be of concern.
Um, I believe that parliament, uh, ensure
that any changes should be, uh, en enabled
to avoid those types of, uh, uh, litigation.
Um, but I believe the amendment is proposed in
order to ensure that the panel
receives appropriate comments from the, uh, authorities,
the regulators, um,
and that those comments cover the issues
that are generally raised from the public, such as,
for example, dust or water are adequately addressed
by those authorities, then that should be where those, uh,
written comments come from.
Thank you. In terms of, oh no, carry on, Damian,
There was a second, uh, part, uh, LAN's question.
In terms of our social license,
I think we've done a fantastic job in engaging
with the community right across, uh, central Otago
and we welcome to continue those conversations for, uh,
all members of the public to understand
what a proposal's about.
Thank you, Jamie. And look,
we'll try Rachel Brooking again.
Hello? Oh, it's working Much better.
Um, just a couple of questions.
I was gonna ask the same question as lan, so that's handy.
I won't repeat it. Um, the, just checking.
So Damien, none of your submission is to do
with supermarkets?
Uh, no, that's not our business.
Thank you. It, it will be a benefit
for our employees though.
And, uh, the second point is most
of your submission is focused on wanting additional
amendments that are not in the bill as it was introduced.
Is that correct?
Uh, a large part of it, yes. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you for that clarification.
Uh, Ryan Hamilton has the next question.
Thanks chair. Uh, quick one for me.
Um, you talked about the process to get to the point
of lodging, uh, Damien
and I just want, would appreciate some insight there
because we heard that, um, we don't, I'm trying
to get clarity from the EPA in terms of
how many people have actually lodged.
Um, 'cause once they're lodging it kicks off a process.
But I guess your point is it's actually hard to get
to the point of even being lodged
because of the ambiguity around council timeframes.
So what's the current regime around council timeframes?
Is there a cap or is it still quite open-ended?
Uh, look in, in particularly in regards to section 30, um,
it, it is quite open.
That is a, um, a hard stop.
We can't, a, an applicant cannot lodge if they do not have
section 30 sign off, both by both, uh, district
and regional councils that there are issues in that regard.
Okay. So that's the greatest restriction you
currently see at the moment.
So have you guys, have you lodged yourselves
or are you still stuck in that council drummer?
Uh, no, we lodged at the end of October.
Okay. So you're in the, you're in the process.
We are in the process having, uh, our application checked
by the EPA for completeness. Okay,
Thank you.
Um, look, just some supplementaries to that.
Um, because you did speak quite a bit around barriers
and delaying projects.
Could you just elaborate a little further on the,
the actual delays and what you're experiencing?
Uh, well, section 30 is a pri uh, primary, uh, reason.
Um, but then there's general, uh, requirement to consult.
Uh, it's very, um, broad and undefined
and we have, uh,
undertaken extensive consultation with local authorities
and regulators
and, uh, it, it is a bit of both sides trying
to learn what the process actually means.
Um, so it's been, um, been a journey.
Um, but um, in our case, I'm happy that we've got there
and we're able to ultimately lodge,
but, uh, certainly a lot more, uh, tightening up of
that consultation process but, uh, help improve the process.
And just on the other point
that you made about the certainty
and clarity in the section 85, could you just, uh,
further perhaps give some examples of, you know,
where you feel, uh, there does need to be, uh,
more certainty because you did speak about investment
and obviously, you know, needing that certainty
for the longer term investment of these projects?
Um, I guess it's a case of, um,
ensuring that where there is inconsistency with a, a,
a specified act or a national policy statement
or environmental statement, uh, standard, that
that's not the sole reason for declining a,
an approval for a project.
That there really does have to be, um, uh,
a reasonable balance or the correct amount of balance given
to the purpose of the act, which is
to facilitate projects for national significance.
Okay. Thank, thank you very much, Damian.
Look, we have met time. Um, thank you for your time today
and all your insights.
Uh, we appreciate it. You have a good day. Thank you.
Thank you. You too.
Um, look, we are ahead of schedule just for those
that are tuning in,
but it looks like we have the Law Association
of New Zealand with us.
So, uh, we will move on to Patrick
and Bridget, you have 10 minutes with us this morning.
We can see you both there, so we'll hand it over to you
for your opening remarks.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good morning.
Members of this select committee.
Uh, my name's Patrick Senior.
I'm a resource management bar at Shortland Chambers,
and with me is Bridget Bailey.
She's a senior associate Holland Beckett in Toga.
We are here for the law association,
formerly Auckland District Law Society.
Our submission is on the workability of this bill.
We are, I guess in this, in a respect, somewhat selfish in
that, um, we are the practitioners that deal with
what comes out the other end of this sausage making factory.
And we would like it to be as smooth, um, efficient,
effective, and workable as as we can possibly make it.
And so our comments are in that regard.
We don't comment really on the policy
or the merits of, of the particular changes.
So, um, that's the general frame for
our comments, which you've received.
And I'm talking so fast
because I want to give Bridgette as much time as possible
to talk through the two
or three key points, um, that we'll address you on.
And then we'll be happy
to answer any questions that you might have.
Bridgette, over to you.
Thanks. So as Patrick said, we are looking
at the amendments through the lens of the purpose of the ACT
and its procedural principles.
And we are concerned that some
of the changes in the amendment bill do seem inconsistent
with that purpose, um,
and could create some unintended consequences, um, around
how the act is intended to apply.
So the act is already a novel process for New Zealand.
Um, and I think it's fair to say it has been controversial.
Um, it's also an incredibly intense process which requires
hugely significant time and resources for an applicant
and all participants.
Um, as a lawyer practicing in this space,
I certainly say it is, it is not for the faint-hearted to go
through the fast track process.
So in that context, we want to ensure the law, uh,
the law is really robust
and workable, um, to all participants,
otherwise it just creates the risk
of judicial review and appeal.
So the key focus are,
we are looking at are those areas which we see could be
unworkable and create more complexity.
Um, some of the changes we see are really useful, um,
particularly around the ability to modify your application
and the process for further information requests
with the EPA before that completeness decision.
Um, those are incredibly high risk areas in the process,
as we've seen in the recent judicial review for the Port
of Toton Ella passage case.
So I think some more flexibility in that area is useful,
but we have noted a few mechanical changes in our
submission, which we think would help.
Um, the substantive points we do want to speak to firstly is
around this new requirement that, um,
a panel does not need to invite someone
to comment if the local authority
or administering agency is already addressing that matter.
Um, we just see that as unworkable given a local authority
or administering agency does not necessarily anticipate
what all other parties are gonna comment on
and have quite a few matters,
which would be outside their purview.
Even if there are similar issues,
they'll be coming at it from a different viewpoint.
Um, so we just see this as a really difficult, um, burden
for the local authority administering agency to discharge.
Um, and given the proce process already, um, limits
participation to quite a significant change to
what is available under the RMA, we do see this
as a high risk area for review.
Um, the other area which we do see, um,
as concerning is the ability to object to a panel member.
Um, so there is no comparable process for this in the RMA
or other jurisdiction as far as we are aware.
We sort of see it as trying
to choose your judge if you went into a court hearing,
which is not a process that is available.
Um, and legally we don't see it
as a required step given the principles of natural justice
around bias and partiality already exist.
Um, practically we do think this is a concern
that it would just simply deter panel members
from going on panels.
It is already a very small pool of people who are able
to sit on these panels.
And if there are potential for objections to them
to go on the public record, we think this would
most likely deter people,
which would then add more efficiencies,
inefficiencies to the process.
Um, so we are suggesting that that provision is removed.
Um, there is a new part of the act propose
around giving panels the ability to impose conditions
requiring infrastructure to be in place
before a development can commence.
Um, we're simply just not clear on what
that's intended to capture.
Given the act already has quite wide powers for conditions
to be put on projects
and a condition can't bind a third party.
Um, in the fast track process,
there is a very short turnaround
between your draft conditions going out and a decision.
And so if there's any gray area around
what those conditions are going to be, we do see that
as a really risky area for appeal and review.
So any provisions around conditions in the act, um,
our viewers should be very clear as to
what those conditions are intended to capture.
Um, the last comment is that the act,
the amendment bill does not have any
transitional provisions.
So the general principle is
that law doesn't apply retrospectively,
but there's a number
of projects in the pipeline at various stages
and there's a lot of steps
and a lot of decisions that have to happen in that process.
Um, so we see the lack of transitional provisions
as just adding more complexity around does the act apply
and when into what process?
Um, now that would be for the panels
and the applicants to all deal with,
but just adding that extra complexity, um,
is just gonna add more, um, inefficiency
and not be effective.
And again, we see that as a risk of appeal and review.
Um, so I've spoken very fast, so apologies for that.
Um, and I, but that is the end of our key comments we wanted
to make and I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you Bridget
and Patrick, look, we've got a flurry of questions.
We will start first with Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Um, a couple of questions about supermarkets
and th thank you very much
for your thoughtful submission as well.
Uh, one is just on that transitional issue,
if there are any supermarkets in the fast track at the
moment and the second that you are aware of.
Um, so whether or not the transitions matter
for supermarkets is the question there.
And secondly, if you were focused on supermarkets
and, um, having supermarkets go
through a fast track process, what are any of these,
how many of these changes are necessary?
So we certainly, we take the position,
we've looked at the process.
Um, I've, I dunno off the top
of my head if there are any supermarkets in the system at
the moment for projects, but I haven't checked.
Um, yeah, look, I don't see any of these changes as applying
to any one specific project or the other.
Um, so I can't really comment on
how they would apply to a supermarket.
Um, we've definitely, we've taken the view
of looking at the process
as a whole rather than individual projects.
It, it's very helpful Bridget, and thank you.
But my, um, I guess if I put my question another way about
whether or not there are any supermarkets in the process,
if they're hypothetically are no supermarkets in the
process, then the transitional provisions
and they're not having any re
retrospective element won't matter for the speeding up
of supermarket applications?
No, the, the, if, if one was still to be lodged, it would,
the act would apply once enforced
to something that was lodged.
I Thank you. Uh, we're now moved to Grant McCullum.
Yeah. Hi. Um, thanks for your submission.
Um, my question is, um, around the,
the time you, you're talking about in the process,
the timeframes that are set out in the, in the,
in the amendments.
What, what, any comment on the timeframes
that have been laid out, uh, particularly the, the, uh,
the 60 day one for the decision making process?
Yeah, so the, we haven't commented on that
because that's sort of more
of a merits issue around the process.
I mean, I would say it, it probably applies
to each project on a case by case basis.
At the moment they look at a suitable timeframe.
Um, if a 60 week working day timeframe is in pros
opposed from a process point of view, then I,
everything in the process does become quite tight.
And it's more important to make sure then that the act
as a whole is very robust
because everyone is working under
incredibly tight timeframes.
Um, so I did hear the panel convener speak
and they talked about it being aware with a push pull.
And so I think that's very applicable
that if you do put in a tight timeframe, then
these other amendments probably do become more critical
to make sure the process is very clear
for everyone going through. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you.
We'll now move to lan.
Thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, just you mentioning
that you heard the panel convener's submission, um, I wanted
to pick up specifically on your concerns around, um,
the potential deterrent of, uh,
panel members actually serving on these fast track panels,
uh, because they raised a really a, a real concern
around particularly reputational damage.
And I wanted to, um,
if I wondered if you would expand on basically the
professionalism of people in these roles
and how all of these changes may actually, like you say, um,
mean that we simply can't find panel members
with the expertise
and professionalism to make these decisions.
Can you expand on that?
I think our concern with it is that the principles of
how panel members are appointed is it's in the fast track
practice note, it's left to the panel conveners
and the principles apply natural justice, which apply
to all sort of judicial, quasi-judicial roles.
That's impartiality bias
that is still assessed in the background.
I think having it codified in statute
and bringing it to the forefront
and creating a process where people can put their concerns
on the public record is a very big departure from any other
process we're aware of currently in our jurisdiction.
And I think the concern is that
the fast track process is already a huge undertaking
for someone to go on as a panel member, um,
and to sort of professionally put their name out there.
I think bringing the ability to object to the forefront
would likely just deter people practically.
Um, it is difficult to get people to sit on panels
because these are big projects
that require a significant amount of skill and expertise.
Um, so our view would be if you added an objection process
that would just slow down
or add inefficiencies to that process
And it's, and it's parochialism, right?
Like the resource management community
is a relatively small one.
We've all had dealings with each other before. Yeah.
Um, giving this ability to, you know,
raise concerns about possible panel members just, just seems
to be tackling a very,
very minor issue when there is a process
for recusal already.
Mm-hmm. Um, it just as Bridget says, you know,
who would sign up to this, um,
whereby the applicant could write a letter publicly and, and
and basically whinge about who the panel member might be.
Mm. Who, who wants that
Look. Thank you Patrick
and Bridget, we have met time
and yeah, we appreciate your time today
and all of those insights,
so we will now move through to thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you.
We'll now move through to our next submitter, uh,
Ridge Burn Limited,
um, Ridge Burn Limited.
We're a little further back, we're just bouncing back
for those following, um,
and we should be seeing them appearing shortly.
Cameron Ridge Burn.
Hopefully we will see pop up coming through.
It appears we may be having a few technical difficulties
bringing Ridge Burn Limited through.
If Cameron and Jeremy, if you can hear us,
if you just wanna take the prompt on your screen
to join the panel.
Uh, so it looks like our panelists,
if you can hear us there, um, you need to accept the prompt
that you are being sent.
Oh, there we go. We can see you there Cameron.
Um, if you just wanna pop your video on,
oh no, we have lost them again.
Look, just while we are working out the technology
with Ridge Burn Limited, we might just jump forward
to Climate Justice, who we have with us,
um, and are ready to go.
Sorry Madam Chair, that was um, me Mistyping,
Could we go to choose clean water?
Choose clean water? Yes.
We'll just bring, choose clean water through.
So they we're just jumping ahead a little bit,
everyone just while we sort sort out some technical
difficulties, we can see you there, Tom.
Oh, there we go Tom, we can see you Welcome
to this select committee this morning
and we can you as well.
So, so Tom, we'll hand hand it over to you, um, uh,
for 10 minutes you have with us this morning.
So, uh, of course members will have questions
but we'll hand over to you for your opening remarks.
Great, thank you very much. We're gonna use most
of our time if that's okay.
Um, thank you for the invitation to speak on this bill.
My name is Tom K and I'm an organizer
and spokesperson for Choose Clean Water,
a campaign group advocating for the protection
and restoration of fresh water INO in New Zealand.
I would've been joined by Marni Prickett, my co-organizer.
She may or may not have jumped on yet, so,
um, yeah, we'll see.
Together we have many years of experience in environmental
policy and planning consenting processes
and public health, particularly as it relates to freshwater.
We acknowledge our submissions been read
and many of the points have been reiterated by others.
We endorse and emphasize those made in oral submissions
by the Parliamentary Commission for the Environment Forest
and Bird and the Fast track panel
conveners you heard last week.
We suspect many others may share and support these views
but may have missed out on the opportunity
to communicate them given the extremely short
submission period for this bill.
Providing such, such a short period
for feedback on such substantial changes
to law without regulatory impact analysis
is not good law making.
These are intergenerationally significant decisions
and quite frankly, how this process has
been handled is not okay.
You should all be concerned at the corrosive effect
of such a process on our democracy.
While some submitters have noted the act appears
to be functioning as intended
or at least as per the purpose in the act,
we retain a fundamental discomfort with it, discomfort
with the projects it enables
and the promotion of these projects by the government, such
as coal and gold mining, large scale irrigation
schemes and large dams.
The act gives limited consideration
to things like water conservation orders,
the national policy statement for freshwater management,
protection of drinking water sources
and natural hazards and climate change.
Even with these in consideration, our consenting
and planning system has not been able
to reverse the general decline in the health
of our freshwater and the safety
of our drinking water sources free from these
considerations, fast track projects, risk direct
and indirect harm to the health and safety of freshwater
and our communities, including
to communities drinking water access to safe,
good quality water as a foundation of society
and many of the projects enabled by the act will erode
that foundation and risk the future security of communities.
It is concerning that the government is considering
lessening the consideration given to the statutes
and policies that protect our water, such as
by elevating whatever may be contained in the
government policy statement.
This bill proposes as decreed by a minister
and with to quote the PCE, no guardrails
and that the government is considering limiting the ability
for a panel to seek the views of those communities
who may be impacted by fast track projects.
These are two concerns we focus on in terms
of government policy statements the bill proposes to provide
for these and to state in them the government policies about
regional or national benefits, there is a very real risk
that this could result in certain types
of projects attaining access to the fast track process
and acquiring approval almost as a right
and that government policy statements could include almost
any direction given there are no further guardrails on
what they must or must not state.
We are extremely concerned
with the potential narrow definition of regional
or national benefits that a minister may impose on decision
making and that these benefits may not need
to be weighed up against potential costs
and impacts, particularly on the health and safety of water.
As an example, take a large scale water storage project
that may enable land use intensification.
Any such project could simply be deemed significant
by a policy statement
or might be able to meet whatever tests are put up
by stating the volume of water it may extract or store
or the land area of land it could irrigate.
However, such a project could pose a long-term risk
to the health and safety of water in the area
through nitrate and pathogen contamination from the
intensive farming that would likely result from the project.
Groundwater is the primary drinking water source
for many people, especially in our rural areas.
And we are already seeing the cost of this kind
of pollution come to beer and communities.
W Mati district Council is spending several million dollars
to provide a safe drinking water source
after theirs became so contaminated with nitrate,
it failed to meet the drinking water.
Standard Cell Wind District Council facing the same problem
has estimated the cost of establishing a new source at
around $400 million.
Work for Christchurch City council, put the price
of deifying the city's water should they need it in future
at between $830,000,001.5 billion.
Defining benefits and isolation of these potential costs.
Risks externalizing those costs,
IE imposing them on the surrounding communities,
local authorities and potentially even back on central
government at risks condemning communities
to huge public healthcare costs or risks or both.
Ultimately government policy statements,
risk so-called project benefits overriding the fundamental
human right to and need for clean, safe drinking water.
Other large projects such as mining have similar risks
and externalized cleanup costs.
Additionally, it's given, uh, given the rhetoric
of this government, it's likely that regional
or national benefits will be defined narrowly
and in economic terms.
However, there are many other benefits of freshwater
that first, that most fundamental benefit
for drinking is priceless
and should be protected as the foundation of society.
This is the fundamental premise between the hierarchy
of obligations or to Mana Wai
that waterways must be kept healthy enough
to sustain the life within them and
therefore sustain human life in our society.
A point which unfortunately seems
to have been lost on many government politicians.
But beyond this there are other intangible benefits.
Swimming in a local swimming hole at the river,
swimming at the beach, jumping off a jetty
into a lake fishing.
These are things that would otherwise be protected
to a greater degree under the RMA.
These are critical and central parts
of our identity As New Zealanders.
Quintessential things we associate with our summers
and memories with friends and family.
Ministers might not see those things as regionally
or nationally significant, but they almost always are.
Think of where you grew up or holidayed.
When you see photos of the happiest most iconic activities
involved in our people's lives, you will more often than not
see a picture of someone swimming at a beach or a river
or fishing or playing with their toddler in an estuary.
Where did you swim? What significance did that place
or activity have for the community?
These are undoubtedly nationally and regionally significant.
They're part of who we are in the best parts of our lives.
There is more to regional
or national significance than an open pit mine
or whatever else is tied to a minister's ideas of an economy
or society or what supports community wellbeing.
People have a freedom and right to enjoy these things
and these rights could be dismissed more readily
with the amendments to this bill
and more readily taken by fast track projects.
In terms of community consultation,
the bill restricts the ability of panels
to seek comments on projects to certain parties.
It further shuts neighbors, local communities, NGOs,
and industry and expert groups from the hearing process.
Unless a panel is confident,
a local authority will not be commenting
sufficiently on the matters.
These groups might raise.
Members here can surely appreciate that there are all sorts
of projects proposed where it would be useful for the views
of these groups to be accessible
to a panel should they consider they need to hear them.
In fact, I suspect many members may want the right
themselves to be heard if they
or their community were to be impacted by a project
and you may not trust your local authority
to represent your concerns sufficiently.
Take again, for example, a large scale irrigation project
and Canterbury, which could lead to a further pollution,
further pollution of groundwater beneath your property.
If you had a private boar that might be impacted by
that project, you might not trust that environment.
Canterbury, your local authority would sufficiently express
the risks of that project to your family's water supply
or sufficiently advocate
for whatever conditions might be required
to protect your supply.
When you know that same local authority has struggled
to manage the impacts of similar projects on the safety
of other water suppliers in your region, to the point
where in the most recent survey around 10%
of groundwater wells were found to have nitrate levels
above the drinking water standard
and 62% should increasing trends.
Whether you are a citizen an NGO
or federated farmers, this bill cuts you further out
of the fast track process.
Community and expert perspective on these issues are
important and useful
and panels should not be prevented from seeking out such
perspectives, preventing a panel seeking these views risks
condemning ordinary New Zealanders to the downstream effects
of projects if their council
or an applicant does not deal with them.
In conclusion, we remind the committee of the degraded state
of freshwater in New Zealand as summarized in our
submission, it is not good.
Water is already given limited consideration
and likely to be given even less following upcoming law
reforms posed by this government.
This fast track amendment proposes less consideration.
Again, the government committed in their coalition
agreements to quote decisions based on data
and evidence what happened to that promise?
These amendments are not based on data and evidence
and they prevent panels from seeking it.
You should not need us or the parliamentary commissioner
for the environment or panel conveners to tell you that.
Look at the lack of regulatory assessment,
there is no evidence the substantive changes in
this bill are required.
We recommend you reject this bill so as not
to worsen the fast track approvals process even further so
as not to cut communities further out of the process
and so as not to risk further eroding the foundational
health of fresh water that we all rely on.
Thank you very much. That's us.
Thank, thank you very much Tom.
Look, you did say you would take your full 10 minutes
and you have, so we do not have unfortunately time
for questions, but we appreciate you coming on earlier today
and appreciate your, uh,
passionate submission. So thank you.
Thank you very much. So we are
now just going to pop back
and see whether we can bring Ridge Burn limited through.
We're gonna have another go. We can see you there, Cameron,
if you just want to try and pop on your video
and your microphone.
We'll just, uh, wait to see if Cameron can
pop on his video and microphone.
Madam Chair? Yes, Jayden.
They kept declining the prompt
and have now dropped off the call.
Okay. Might I suggest we move ahead to Frank's Ogilvy?
Okay, brilliant. So we have got Frank's Ogilvy
online, so we will bring them through our next submitter.
There we go. And we can see them there. Good morning.
We can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
We will hand it over to you.
You have 10 minutes with us that, uh, take your submission
as read and of course members will have questions.
Good morning. Um, thank you
for this opportunity to submit.
We are Frank Sori. We're a public
and commercial law firm, uh, based in Wellington.
We have extensive experience in advising commercial
and private clients on consenting and resource matters.
Uh, the intent of our submission today, it's not on behalf
of any client, but rather looking at the intent of
what the government is seeking to achieve,
but the fast track, uh, bill or amendment bill
and what they may mean for the fast tracked act.
So we have focused on technical, uh, requirements.
Uh, we have provided a summary at paragraph five,
our submission if you have not managed
to read the whole thing, uh, which outlines our sort of key,
uh, areas of concern or areas for improvement.
Uh, but we're not seeking to run through that submission.
Uh, but we're happy to take questions as you have them
Just mate, I was on mute there.
So, uh, thank you very much Bridget.
We will, uh, go Tolan for our first question.
Yeah, ua, thank you for your submission today.
Um, I wanted to ask about the aspect of your submission
where you think that this bill is a missed opportunity
to correct some recent panel decisions where they've used
that discretionary power in section 85 3
to actually decline approvals
and your recommending that it be amended.
Can you expand particularly on the formal onus
of proof on opponents to, uh,
establish a disproportionate impact?
I was interested in that and then also, um,
what you think the number two, the explicit presumption
that all listed in referred projects, uh, should be presumed
to have significant regional national benefit, what impact
that would have on the process.
Thank you. Um, so yes, the these two points really go
to the same things.
So the purpose of the act is to enable the delivery
of these projects with
significant national regional benefits.
And, uh, there's a clear intent in section 85 3
a clear prior waiting.
It's not the same as the traditional consenting regimes
where it's a, it's an even playing field
between environmental and economic concerns.
Uh, there is, there's particularly one recent panel
decision, the draft delmore decision referred
to in paragraph 28 B.
Uh, it wasn't so much the decision itself.
I mean, we can't comment on whether it was the right
or wrong decision, but it was the reasoning
that was applied in that decision there was
that the panel there rejected the notion
that projects that had reached the panel were assumed
to have significant national regional benefits.
They were, they put an onus of proof on the applicant
to establish the benefit which they failed to do.
And that that reasoning has a lot in common with
that scene under the consenting regimes
that this is designed to go over.
Uh, and so I mean, it's clear from this amendment bill that
the government is aware of this.
So clause 55 adds to the title of schedule two
with significant national or regional benefits.
Uh, so they're aware of this problem, um,
that the clear intent of the act as enacted was
that there should be a prior weight towards
enabling development and that opponents should be required
to prove otherwise.
And that's the amendments that we propose.
I intend to clarify that.
Okay, great. So just to, just to clarify,
you are saying it, it shouldn't be on the applicant
to actually demonstrate clear regional national benefits.
It should be on the, on anyone who is
say against the project or wants it changed
or something to beyond a doubt prove
that it doesn't hold those benefits. So the owners
Doubt, um, that's a, it's a more of a criminal standard
of proof, but to prove, so it's, it's assumed
unless the ben, unless the benefits are wholly speculative,
that those benefits are established for more jobs,
for example, more housing supply, et cetera.
And then opponents of the project can come in
and say, well actually there's no, for example, there's no,
uh, ability to provide water infrastructure
or there's massive impacts on biodiversity
or, you know, any number of other environmental impacts.
And if it's clear that those costs outweigh the benefits
that have been outlined, then that would be a valid, uh,
opportunity for the panel to use
that discretion under section 85 3.
Thank you. Look, we'll move
to Cameron Luxton for the next question.
Thank you Chair. Uh, thank you Max.
And Bridget, uh, my questions to do with the ability
to make amendments to the schedule two listed projects.
Uh, I mean we've gone through something that's exemplified a
a, uh, the stellar passage, uh, application,
which is clearly national and regional benefits,
but has been held up through a process.
How do you think adding this, uh, schedule two uh, change
will actually enable projects that are clearly designed
to be followed through?
And, uh, do you think there needs to be a change on that
to make it more clear that a listed project, uh, is intended
to, to be the project described?
Thank you. Yes. Um, so that the change
proposed would essentially,
so this bill corrects the stellar passage issued directly,
which was subject to a, a successful judicial review.
What this, uh, this power under the new section 1 1 7 A
would do would be to enable
where there are the technical errors in project description
where it's clear that a project was intended to go ahead,
but for whatever reason the wording is not adequate
or has it been defined correctly, it would enable that
to be dealt with quickly rather than having to, for example,
create an entire amendment bill as it's being done here.
Just to, just to correct that error.
Um, because the, with listed projects,
the description in the, the way the courts have applied,
the description in the ACT is strict
and that means that the EPA can only
refer a project to a panel convener if the, um, if,
if it's exactly on point, if it solely relates
to a list of projects.
So there's no room for error, um, in, in how the, in the,
in the legislation, um,
before it will result in projects being barred essentially.
And can I just make a stuff on that chair?
It's just how, who, who would be, uh,
how do you see it actually functioning the amendment to the,
to the listed name, you know, on the, on the schedule two,
how would that actually function?
At what point do you think that should, uh, be raised or,
or that point taken into account?
And then who would actually address that?
Would it be a minister? Would it be a panel?
Uh, who, who would be doing that?
So it would be the, the minister would be
responsible for making the order.
Um, as with the, the stellar passage development, I'm,
I mean, I'm not sure how the minister became aware of that.
It was reasonably high profile,
so they could have just been reading the news,
but potentially the, uh, the industry involved, the,
the applicant could contact the minister.
Um, I mean there's any number of ways it could get
to the minister, but then the power is
vested in the minister.
And if, I mean, with the drafting
and the, um, in the bill, if there are any concerns
that the applicant is trying to pull a fast one, you know,
change fundamentally change the type of project
that they're doing or something like that, then
that the power is very constrained.
That doesn't enable the minister to do that.
It's solely for correcting technical errors
of the kind in the stellar passage case. Thank
You. Thank
you. Look, we'll move to Priyanka now and then Ryan.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair.
Um, my question actually relates to your response
to Land farms question, um, in which you, uh,
have said that the owners should be on those
who oppose the project to, um, show to demonstrate
that the costs outweigh the benefits of the project.
Um, and my question is, how would they be able to do that,
given that the ACT does not, um, say
that a cost benefit analysis is mandatory.
And that's something that's come up through, um,
the hearings process with some of the applications
that are currently being heard.
So neither the, uh, primary act
nor this amendment bill would make that cost benefit,
uh, analysis mandatory.
So would you then suggest that it is, because
otherwise how would those who oppose the project know
what the true costs or benefits are?
So the, the, the ACT does in fact, um,
include a cost benefit analysis.
So section 85 3 is a, so it says, I'll just read it briefly.
So panel may decline
and approval if it forms the view that there are one
or more adverse impacts, um, relation to the approval.
And there those adverse impacts are sufficiently significant
to be outta proportion to the projects
regional or national benefits.
So that is, that is a, a balancing exercise.
It's weighted towards approvals.
It does suggest that there needs
to be very high adverse impacts
to outweigh those, those benefits.
But that is a, in effect, a cost benefit analysis.
And, and our recommended amendments simply go
to make it clearer that
that cost benefit analysis puts the onus on opponents
and not on the applicants themselves.
Yeah, that course Still doesn't make it
mandatory, but I take your point.
We'll just have time for one last quick
question. Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks chair. Um, thanks for your submission.
Um, I was just interested in your,
your response I effectively third party appeal rights and,
and limiting the scope of the judicial review.
I thought that was a helpful submission.
I was just keen for you to expand
specifically on your points there.
And obviously you also mentioned, uh, time extensions for
complex projects.
'cause we heard from the EPA that they already felt quite
constrained, but your suggestion
that perhaps on complex projects they could just
apply for an extension.
So just your expansions on those.
Yeah, I think on the first point,
the government has been very clear,
I think in establishing the fast track regime that one
of the key concerns was, uh, litigation
and court processes that take years upon years.
So applying that lens across, uh, here,
across the regime at the moment,
I think really important in terms of third party rights
because of the fact that if you are able
to put in a comment you made
therefore be able to, uh, have appeal rights, that
that is important to restrict that
judicial review is something that the minister,
I think canvassed quite closely in the original act
and consideration about whether
or not it could be restricted.
Uh, this is a continuation of the submission
that we put in on that original act to say
that judicial review still had the ability, uh,
to constrain the process quite considerably.
And we see that in our practice, uh, all the time, uh,
particularly with delays in the courts, that
that can be several, several years to several decades, uh,
long of, uh, litigation.
So I think that's, uh, a risk that needs to be considered.
Uh, on the second point, I think, did you have anything
to add further on?
Yeah. Oh, I mean look, I I would just repeat what the, um,
the panel convener said they,
they submitted quite extensively on this.
I mean, you need, you, you want
to get outcomes quickly, and that's understandable.
So including as a starting point, 60 working days.
But if you, if you do that as we know in the submission, um,
I mean that might not be enough
for particularly complex cases
and it's, it has a potential to increase the error rate
in decisions and that creates legal, legal risk essentially.
So I mean it's, that's really
what the panel convener has has said,
but we would would second that.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much.
We have met time this morning.
Uh, we appreciate all your analysis. Very helpful.
Thank you. Thank you.
So look, we are going to try one last time, uh,
to Ridge Burn Limited, who we have tried to, uh,
bring up a couple of times now they are there.
So we'll just, uh, give them one more chance
and see if we can get them through.
So if Ridge by limited, if they are there, they just need
to accept the prompt to bring you through as a panelist.
Okay. He dropped off the call again, Madam Chair. Okay.
Okay, that's fine. We will now move through then
to our next submitter who is the New Zealand initiative.
We should have Eric there who we can see.
Eric, you are ready to go.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you,
but do take your submission as read.
It is a very, uh, thorough submission, so lots in there.
So I am sure members will have questions as well.
So we'll hand it over to you, Eric.
I think Nick will lead us off. Yeah.
Oh, there we go, Nick, we can see you. Brilliant
Here. I'm, hi
everyone. Good morning and thank you.
I'm Nick Clark, um, from the New Zealand Initiative.
And as you know, with me, as Dr.
Eric Crampton, our chief economist, um, we support this bill
as an opportunity not only to accelerate worthy investment,
but also importantly to embed stronger disciplines
of transparency, accountability,
and economic efficiency into the fast track system itself.
But firstly, I'll ask Eric
to speak in particular on the grocery competition provision.
So Eric, just over to you.
Great, thanks Nick.
So as you'll know, we had proposed a slightly different
framework a few months ago for enabling fast track entry
for supermarkets that would've had a dedicated fast track
that was only for supermarkets.
The governments decided to bring supermarkets into the
existing fast track, which will get things done a fair bit
more quickly, less process around it that we don't have
to have a new set of legislation.
Unfortunately, by putting supermarkets into the same
approvals process as you have for mines
and things that have potential environmental consequence,
we might end up in a bit of overkill when it comes
to supermarkets in some aspects.
So it was great hearing a little bit earlier.
I logged in early
and heard bits from Frank Ogilvy on requiring
that the opponents be the one that put up the case
that it's, uh, contrary to cost benefit.
It'd be overkill to require showing a net benefit
for entry into supermarkets
unless you're in a spot where, uh, one
of the incumbents is proposing to use this framework.
And the purpose of it is to enhance competition. Yeah.
There you want to have a com competition test to make sure
that it's actually furthering goals.
The one bit that we were particularly keen on seeing in
here, if you really wanna enable it in supermarkets is
getting rid of some of the shenanigans
that stop existing supermarkets.
So we often see cases
where supermarkets putting in a consent applications have
to prove that they're not doing enormous harm to
a neighborhood just by, uh, a mile down the road.
Because the resource management system since 2009 ish,
has deemed these retail distribution effects
as being a terrible thing
that if I take customers away from another shopping center,
well that's just terrible for their environment.
So you're not allowed to open a new supermarket
unless you can show that there are enough customers
for everybody to be able to play nice and friendly together
and never actually compete.
Well, the purpose of this legislation is meant
to be enhancing competition.
So we suggest redefining
or actually defining things in the legislations that we know
that retail district, that trade competition will be read
as including these retail distribution effects
that panels are not allowed to consider them
and not allowed to block supermarkets on that basis.
We go through that in the, uh, in the, in our submission.
I'll pass back to Nick to go through some, some
of the other bits and hopefully leave time for questions.
Great, thanks Eric.
And, uh, the next issue to hit on is the benefit test.
So in our submission on the original, um,
fast track legislation last year, we wanted to see,
um, you know, um, economic efficiency and economic benefits
and costs, um, in the, in the legislation, um,
that wasn't in there except sort of this amorphous,
significant regional national benefits.
But nowhere does this require the waning
of costs against benefits and, um, for a net benefit test.
And we believe this is economically unsound.
So we recommend amending section 22 of the act
to require ministers be satisfied
that projects deliver net benefits, not just sort
of significant regional
or national benefits
for low impact projects like supermarkets.
This could be quite simple, just evidence, they'll pay
for necessary roading, um,
improvements would probably suffice,
but for projects with more significant environmental, uh,
effects, this could require proportionate cost
benefit analysis.
And this isn't about slowing the process,
it's about ensuring that we prioritize the fast track
for the most beneficial projects.
Our next set of concerns are sort of process issues.
Uh, we discussed a number of these in our submission,
but I want to hit on a few of the more significant ones.
Firstly, the ability of councils
and especially applicants to challenge panel members.
It's novel to say the least. Um, very unusual.
Um, I'm told we would prefer this issue.
We would prefer this, this particular thing,
not be in the bill, but,
and we would prefer this issue to be fixed
by tightening up on panel expertise to ensure
that high quality people are in the pool for membership.
That's, that addresses the problem at its source, not, um,
during the process itself.
And, uh, every panel in our view,
should include at least one member with economic expertise.
That is not a requirement at the moment.
Secondly, we've got the GPS mechanism,
and while potentially useful government policy statements,
they must be subject to not only just publication of them
after the effect in the Gazette,
but consultation on them as well to ensure transparency
and confidence in the system.
Without statutory safeguards of this manner,
GPSs could become vehicles
for opaque ministerial direction rather than
transparent policy guidance.
Third, while the provision, the provision
for enabling orders and council for schedule amendments,
it should be made clear that it applies
to minor technical changes only at the moment it says
that it shouldn't be for significant changes,
but there's a gray area in between
and we think that those sort of, uh,
schedule amendments should only be for those
that are technical minor changes only.
And fourth, um, there's no provision for a sunset clause
as befitting what should be a temporary fix
before RMA uh, replacement is in place,
or even a clause for post-implementation review.
And this is novel legislation
that deserves proper evaluation in our, in our view.
So we've made a number of recommendations in our submission,
um, that, um, I'm sure you've hopefully all read and,
and can ask us questions about,
but I guess to summarize,
this isn't about slowing the fast track.
It's about making it more defensible, transparent
and economically efficient.
And finally, just wanna hit, hit on the fact
that the fast track regime, it's no substitute
for comprehensive RMA reform,
but a necessary interim measure,
and it should be an interim measure
and not a permanent measure until we get that,
that comprehensive reform in place.
And, um, that's where we wanna leave it
and we'll have very happy to take questions.
Eric and I thank you.
Thank you Eric and Nick.
Uh, look, we'll move to the first question
from Cameron Luxton.
Thank you chair. Uh, look, I've got a question about the,
uh, the, the guidance on regional, um, the regional
and national significance.
You've said it satisfies the minister.
Is that a high enough burden to limit, uh, judicial reviews?
And while I've got the mic also, um, on the,
the planning versus environment, the difference
between should we be separating this between planning laws
that are for supermarkets
and property development versus environmental, uh, pathways
for, say, mining and port infrastructure?
So, um, in terms of the, in terms of the first question,
um, I'm not sure what the answer to that is, to be honest.
Um, but what we are, what we're saying at the moment,
there is no definition of what
a significant national or regional benefit is,
and certainly the way it seems to have been,
and there seems to be a bit of inconsistency in the way
panels are, um, assessing
or requiring assessments of what those benefits should be.
Some of them are, do appear to be, as we said now,
submission requiring, um, cost benefit analysis.
Some aren't. And I think we need to have a bit
of clarity there, not just for what the panels are doing,
but when ministers actually decide, uh,
whether something should be referred to a panel.
So, um, take, take that as a, as a sort
of a rough answer to your question, Cameron.
Um, Eric, maybe you could answer the second question. Yeah,
I don't know anything on the JR side,
you'll have to talk to lawyers on that.
I'm just an economist. Um,
we had suggested having a separate piece
of legislation just for supermarkets.
I think there's an important distinction between things
that happen within an existing urban environment
and things that happen out in nature.
Um, one, uh, the way
that we'd seen the Fast Track bill trying
to reconcile this was with the, uh,
government policy statement mechanisms.
You could say within that, well,
obviously supermarkets aren't like
in a natural wilderness or something.
Uh, you can just treat the built environment
as being the built environment
and let's restrict some of the things
that have been used within an urban
environment to block supermarkets.
I if this mechanism winds up not enabling supermarket entry,
the thing that I worry about is people concluding that, oh,
well therefore, uh, there isn't any demand
to have a new supermarket here
and we need to do something else.
Well, it could be that this process is not
yet enabling enough, and it'd be worth going back to
what we'd initially suggested is a dedicated track
for supermarkets, depending on how long it takes
or a reform to get through.
Thank. Okay, thank you. Okay, thank you.
Look, we'll move to Land Farm now for a question. Sure.
Thank you so much for your comprehensive submission.
Um, I wanted to ask specifically on, uh,
the ministerial directions
to the Environmental Protection Authority.
And there's been a lot of concern and critique about this,
and you yourself, say it sits uncomfortably close
to the boundary between policy guidance
and administrative interference,
but then you talk about a few things that could be done
to make this more appropriate.
Would you be able to expand on that for the committee? Sure.
I'll just have to go back to my submission just briefly.
Um,
Sorry, just to guide you, it's page 12.
Yep. Clause 48.
Clause 48, Clause 4.90,
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
So we would suggest that it, um,
but you need some very clear, um, boundaries there.
Um, you know, they, they need
to have directions published in the Gazette, um,
on the EPAs website, um, with a brief statement of purpose.
And there needs to be a very clear sort of indication that
it's all about transparency really,
and making sure that, um, that, that, that, that there's a,
there's understanding of what is being done.
I don't, I mean, I, it is, you are quite correct.
It is something that does sit a little bit uneasily with us.
Um, but it's something
that transparency is the best way to deal with it.
And, um, we wanna make sure that those,
those directions are very clearly, um, elucidated
and are open for the public
and for groups to be able to see them in then potentially,
you know, use the political means to, um, address them
And a sunset clause.
Oh yes, of course. Well then, yeah,
we definitely want a sunset clause
and a post-implementation review as well,
because this stuff is novel
and, um, you know,
it does butt up against quite a few established, um,
you know, conventions.
Um, and, uh, you know, it is, it is something we see
as a temporary fix until our end reform is in place.
Look, we'll just take one last
quick question from Priyanka.
Uh, thank you.
I was, um, I had a couple, I'll pick one now.
Um, I wondered if you could, um, uh,
maybe expand on the point in your submission
around the GPS.
Um, you've said that it's well intentioned,
but that you feel that it could be
counterproductive, um, in your view.
Um, could you, could you just elaborate on your concern
there in relation to what you said, which is I think to
what Eric said, which is that you're worried
that ultimately out of this,
that it wouldn't actually increase, um,
supermarket competition,
but would, would lead to unintended consequences?
I'll let you answer that one, Eric. You
Like, oh, you'd, you'd had the bit on the GPS in
particular here.
I'd, the worry that I've had is that, um,
this isn't quite enabling enough for, uh,
new supermarket entry.
The fast track kind of sits on top
of existing planning provisions.
What we had suggested was one
that would actually modify existing plans.
So then you've got more certainty if you've got your shop
set up, if you wanna make changes to it later,
you're not dealing with something
that's sitting uncomfortably on top of a, a city plan.
Instead it's been a planned change.
So you're authorized to do what you're doing there.
You're not triggering a whole pile
of nonsense if you ever wanna modify anything.
Um, we'd also suggested that in, in our version
supermarkets that are authorized through
that fast track would be mixed use by default, so
that there'd be other opportunities.
Like if somebody wanted to stick an apartment tower on top
of a supermarket and say it was KO Land, KO
Korra could lease out a few floors as social housing
that could make numbers pencil for development where they
otherwise couldn't because you're getting the value
of the up zoning coming in, coming in there as well.
So we'd like that kind of a mechanism
and we're just nervous that this doesn't quite go far enough
when it comes to supermarkets.
If we don't get supermarket entry out of this.
Don't conclude that planning isn't still a barrier,
but we'll see how far RM takes us.
Brilliant. We'll have to leave it there.
Thank you very much Eric and Nick for your time today.
We appreciate it and, uh, really great submission.
Very, very thorough, um, and weighty there.
So lots of insights for us to take on board,
so thank you. Thank
You, thank you.
So we will now move through to our next submitter who is
with us the call action network.
Ah,
Kia. Could you hear me okay
Kia Tim? Yes. We
can see and hear you.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you for 10 minutes.
Uh, take your submission as read
and of course members will have questions. So over to you.
Excellent, thank you. So I have a further oral submission
and then there should be a little bit of time
for questions at the end.
Coal Action Network alter orders a national organization
working to bring an end to coal mining and use in both
because of the disastrous effect
of burning coal on the climate
and the effects of coal mining and burning on our air, land
and water and on the health of communities, we coal is mined
and burned as such, we were strongly opposed
to the Fast Track Approvals Act
and we are completely opposed
to the fast track approvals amendment bill.
We submit that it should be rejected by this committee
and that the bill should be withdrawn
should it not be withdrawn.
We have suggested in our written submission a number
of changes that should be made to make the bill less bad,
but no amount of amendments will be enough
to fix such a fundamentally flawed bill.
The First Track Approvals Act is a bad law.
It is bad for the environment, bad for communities, a bad
for democracy, thanks to the hard worker dedication
of community and advocacy groups,
iwi the Environmental Protection Agency
and expert panel members and conveners
and many lawyers appalled by the provisions of that act.
But government has not been able to use the act as intended
to rapidly push
through environmentally destructive mining projects
that benefit a small
and well connected circle of mining companies.
In some respects,
what certain ministers hope would be a fast track has been
more of a slow track to frustration,
but the government has learned the wrong
lesson from this process.
The government received ample warning
of the Fast Track approvals act,
many deficiencies from a large number of submitters,
including those with deep expertise in our
environmental and legal systems.
The government chose to ignore those warnings,
and so it should be no surprise
that the act has not worked as intended.
However, instead of repealing that failing act
and reverting to established principles of
and resource consent processes,
the government has instead chosen
to double down on its many flaws by
introducing this Fast Track Approvals Amendment Bill
two proposed coal mining projects are currently listed under
the Fast Track Approvals Act,
the Bull Plateau Continuation Project
and the Rotter Wild Mine Continuation Project.
The Bull Plateau Continuation Project is better known
as the Denton Coal Mine Project.
If this proceeds, it would utterly destroy the beautiful
biodiverse Denton Plateau and pollute west coast rivers
and streams with acid mine drainage
as is already happened from previous mines on that plateau
on a small part of the plateau, I should say.
Furthermore, none of its coal is
for use in ro It is all destined for export
to line the pockets
of an Australian coal mining company while New Zealand
receives a pittance in royalties
far less than will be needed to pay
for the damage caused by the mine.
Meanwhile, the Rotter Wilder Mine continuation project,
which is near Huntley, would encourage the continued burning
of coal for industrial heat, further delaying the transition
to renewable energy that our climate and our domestic
and international climate commitments require.
The provisions of the fast track approval amendments bill
and in part amendment bill
and in particular the enhance ministerial powers.
The further limitations on invited party comments
and the removal of appeal rights from invited third parties
are designed to make it even easier
for such environmentally ruinous projects to proceed.
This is dangerously irresponsible
in our view in its recent mining policy statement.
The Green Party was quite right to say
that it will revoke coal mining consents
that receive approval under this fast track process.
Now on the 22nd of October, I attended the Denton
and National Treasurer event at Parliament organized
by Forest and Bird and three 50.
I was pleased to see that a number
of mps from across the political spectrum spoke at
and attended this event, which showed us very clearly
how special denniston is
and how much it matters to protect it.
Later that same evening, the first reading debate
of Julian Genta MP's private members bill the Crown Minerals
prohibition on coal mining amendment Bill was held,
although government parties voted against this bill
and it did not pass, a government member suggested
that the den and plateau should be
protected from coal mining.
And, and I should note here
that I'm taking excerpt from the cons, uh,
the comments in Hanard by Simon Court mp.
He said the responsible path is to avoid sensitive areas
where practical, maybe the Denton Plateau is one of those
encouraging words from a surprising source
and I welcome them, but if this bill is passed,
those fine words will count for nothing
because it will become even more difficult
to prevent half-baked environmentally destructive projects
such as coal mining on the Denton Plateau From going ahead,
I urge this committee to recommend
that this bill we withdrawn.
Thank you, Tim, for your submission.
Look, we'll go to Celia Wade Brown
who has the first question for you.
Sure, Tim, good to hear you.
Um, I was interested in your, your submission,
a great submission, but particularly, um,
with the Fast Track, the original Fast Track bill, um,
there's quite a significant change in that it was no longer
ministerial approval for projects,
but it was a panel decision.
To what extent do you feel that this amendment Bill reverses
that rather welcome change?
My impression of this amendment bill is
that ministers thought they were getting a rubber stamp
that projects that they selected to meet purposes
that they had would be just hand
waved into existence.
Now I have been, I have to say, pleasantly surprised
by the determination of those expert panels to do a good job
to actually review the projects, to look serious at them
and to take the environmental damage
that they will cause seriously.
And what I think has happened here is
that ministers have gone uhoh,
we are not getting these projects through that we,
that we want and that our backers want, we are going
to put an even heavier hand on the scale
to try to get these through.
So it's one of the many, the, the, to be clear,
the original bill is completely unacceptable in our view.
These changes make it even worse if they go through.
Thank you. Thank you.
And we'll, time for one last question from Lan Farm.
Tim, thanks so much for being here today. Sure.
My question is, I wondered if you would expand
for the committee on the, the aspects where, particularly
with the GPS that the ministers basically have, uh,
no barriers on what they would put in that
to direct the panels.
If those GPSs were to apply to the decision making,
even in those two existing coal mining applications
that are in train, what would that mean
to Coal Action Network
and the community that you represent today?
What I would say to that,
and I haven't specifically studied the effects of those
GPSs, but what I would say to that, that
ministers issuing direction which overrides long
established principles of environmental protection, which
limits, and, and we see again,
this continued encroachment on, on this continued,
um, move towards a state in which ministers are the
only source of wisdom.
I, I would suggest that our political history shows that
that is a very dangerous path to go down
and that we should not be allowing ministers
to dictate which projects do and do not.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much, Tim. Look, we have met time now.
We appreciate your time and your submission this morning.
Thank you. And I'll actually be doing double duty.
I'm back to do a submission
for another group fairly soon. See you then. Oh,
Brilliant. We'll see you then,
Tim.
Okay, now we will move on to our next submitter
who we have online, TE
or Nati koki tu.
And we can see you there.
Ana, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you.
You've got 10 minutes with us. Thank you.
And thank you for your time today, all of you.
My name is Ana. I am the re
speaking on behalf of na, the HOA of Matu.
Matu is a coastal community of profound cultural,
historical, and environmental significance.
It is the landing place of TA Waka
and in the early days of the country's economic development
was a major port for shipping flex product internationally.
If you don't know where we are, we're a little bit south
of TGA and a little bit north of Whakatane
and the home of the delicious mtu pies.
We live between two estuaries, mtu, and Wahi.
These estuaries hold our whakapapa, our kai, our stories
and our responsibilities as kaki.
These are not abstract concepts, they're the places
that shape our identity and sustain our wellbeing.
Tu is the mandated representative body for our hapu
and whanau and we lead major environmental
and catchment restoration programs in community-wide
climate resilience planning.
We work closely with councils, scientists, landowners,
local businesses, and of course our community
essential achievement is the ATU Climate Adaptation Plan.
An iwi led award-winning strategy
that brings together ma Maori climate science
and community visioning
that identifies risks from sea level rise, flooding,
coastal erosion and climate pressures,
and sets out five strategic copa.
It is a holistic blueprint for resilient future shaped
by our people and is inclusive of the whole community.
Our work is always guided by one purpose
to ensure our people, our ua, our why,
and our mo Moana survive and thrive for generations to come.
You have our submission, and I'll take it as read.
Our position is clear. We support economic development.
We are not obstructionist,
but a strong sustainable economy only exists when the
environment is healthy and communities are thriving.
Here is a, that embodies that position.
When the environment thrives, the people thrive
and so does the economy.
We have two main points to make in our verbal submission.
The first is to impress on,
impress on you the real world cost of environmental damage.
In we see firsthand the consequences of decades
of agricultural intensification in our two major catchments,
the WA catchment, which is impacting the Wahi Esri
and the Una catchment impacting the tu Esri.
And both have suffered massive decline due
to economic development decisions of the past.
Over 90% of our wetlands have been lost.
Sea grass has been obliterated.
Our places for ing Kai are degraded
and we have major quality water quality issues.
Public health warnings have become normalized.
We can no longer take the kai from those ies
and we can't even swim due to the water pollution.
Let me give you one brief, very real example.
Last summer when yet another shellfish warning was issued,
our UA re reminded us again how they used
to gather Kai with their parents and grandparents.
I remember distinctly as a teenager
after enjoying a childhood of swimming
and collecting Kai in the estuaries being told, no,
don't eat the pippies in the from there
today we tell our mouna they cannot swim or collect pippi
because the estuaries are too polluted.
That is the cost of past decisions
and that is what happens when environmental impacts are
overlooked and ignored.
And the burden of fixing this has fallen onto us.
We have intergenerational teams of working in the estuaries
and surrounding wetlands and waterways, including Artel
and our teams of tki led by Rewe Corbert,
Nick Chalmers Teel, Laura Ray
Canan Clancy Alpha Conroy, all with the support
of our board, Ang Port Manu, Liam Tael,
and our pii including Pet Tap, Willi KA
Maimon and Susan Elliot.
And we have a much wider group of T
and NTA who are also on site as often as possible.
I'm telling you about these people
because they're the ones that are fixing up decades
of poor decision making.
We are restoring the wetlands,
we are rebuilding the sea grass meadows.
We are improving fish passage.
We are remediating stormwater issues.
We are undertaking pest control
and leading catchment wide restoration.
And we will be doing this for generations.
And that's just to repair the damage from past decisions.
When major developments are proposed, iwi
and communities bring critical knowledge that developers
and consultants simply do not have.
We understand the species, we understand the hydrology,
we understand the risks, the history, the impact
because we live with them.
Iwi involvement is not a delay, it is due diligence.
It prevents costly mistakes, it improves design,
it strengthens decisions.
And it should be a normal and accepted part
of any major planning process.
Good development requires good information,
and that means including us.
And that brings me to our second main point
for this verbal submission, the legacy of today's mps.
This bill is not just a procedural adjustment,
it is a statement about what kind
of leadership you want to be known for.
Your decisions will shape not only economic sustainability,
but also climate impacts, environmental health,
intergenerational wellbeing, and community resilience.
None of these can be properly protected if iwi
and community voices are excluded
or if major decisions are rushed.
Let me be crystal clear.
Partnership engagement is not a barrier.
It is a constitutional responsibility
and it is also good governance
that leads to better outcomes.
We are here because we want terro to succeed economically,
socially, and environmentally.
We want development,
but we want it to be robust informed and future proof.
So I ask you directly, what will be your legacy as members
of parliament and leaders of ua?
Will it be short term thinking
that prioritizes speed over sustainability?
Or will it be a legacy of wisdom development
that is informed, inclusive,
and provides for a positive livable future?
One day long after this parliament has ended,
your UNA will live with the consequences
of the decisions made by this committee.
Will they thank you for your wisdom
or will they question your haste?
The environment is not separate from the economy
and people are not separate from the environment.
Our future depends on decisions
that recognize this fundamental truth.
In closing, we urge you to ensure iwi
and communities remain meaningfully involved in decisions
that will shape our ua, our Moana, our why, and our mouna.
Let your legacy be one
of why's inform sustainable decision making development
that strengthens our environment,
our communities in the long term prosperity of ua.
Finally, I repeat the, I mentioned earlier
when the environment thrives, the people thrive
and when the people thrive, so does the economy.
Thank you very much for that passionate submission.
Look, I will hand over to Celia Wade Brown,
who has the first question.
Ana, I really like the way
that you've put the interconnectedness
and the dependency of the economy on the environment,
and I'd like to thank you for the mahi that you
and your colleagues are doing.
Um, I had a, that's big picture.
I have got quite a small question.
Um, on 0.9,
you say previously refused projects must not be
automatically revived
and you're talking about them refused under the
Fast track Act.
What's your view about projects that have been previously,
um, refused under the highest environment court
or even, um, higher jurisdictions,
whether those zombie projects should be ruled out as well?
Oh, we had intended to include those as well when we see,
said that those previous projects should
not be revised. Thank you.
Thank you for the clarification, Dan. I quick
Now we'll just move to Priyanka for a question.
Uh, uh, Ana, thank you for your strong, uh, written
and verbal submissions.
Um, I have two very quick, um, questions
and potentially interrelated, um,
your point in your written submission around, um, the fact
that ministers should not have too much ability
to interfere in the decision making is your worry there
around the, uh, GPS
and as others have said,
that it doesn't contain any guardrails and
therefore could go a lot wider than just supermarkets.
That's my first question.
Um, and my second question is that you've made the point
that these decisions need to be evidence-based.
Uh, there isn't a requirement in, uh, the act
or this bill for a mandatory cost benefit
analysis by applicants.
They can provide it if they want to,
but it's not required, uh, by law.
Is that something that you have considered?
I don't see it in your suggestions.
Um, and that's why I'm wondering whether that's something
that you have considered as something that would
Be required. Thank
you. I I think the short answer on both your questions
is yes, we're very concerned about the, um,
freedom that of ministerial decision making that is embedded
in, um, in the bill.
Um, and, uh, yes, I I probably can't add too much more than
that than what's in my, um, what's in my, um,
what's in our submission.
But you, the, the short answer
to both your questions is yes.
Look, thank you very much Ruhana.
We have met time this morning
and we appreciate your time, um,
coming on board to submit today.
So thank you. Thank you.
So we will now move through to our next submitter,
the Queenstown Lakes District Council
and we can see you there.
David popping up.
Just trying to come in now. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. We just can't see you.
Let me try and resolve, there we go.
There We Go. Magic.
Yep,
we can see you. Good morning.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us
and we'll hand over to you for your opening remarks,
but take your submission as read.
Great, thank you very much.
Well, the opening remarks really will just
for very brief summary of the submission,
then any questions that you may have.
Um, look, I think, uh, it's,
it's probably well known across New Zealand.
Queenstown Lakes district is a small district, um,
with a small district council,
but, um, packs quite a big punch in New Zealand in terms of,
um, assisting with their economic growth with regard
to the amendment, um, to the fast track approvals.
We have a number of different fast tracks going right now,
I think we're at about seven or eight,
which is probably the most in the country
in relation to the fast tracks.
Through the process in such a small district,
we have not got a large council to be able to cater for
resourcing of these, um, of the requirements
that have been set out to date
for these fast track consents.
So everyone's working quite hard,
but I think we're creaking around the edges, which is, um,
very fair to say in terms of what's proposed.
Um, cost recovery has been an issue
for Queenstown Lakes district since
the inception of this act.
Um, in that, um, there's a, a number
of areas without clarity as to
how we can ensure rate payers rather than developers
themselves are not responsible for the costs associated
with Queenstown being able to get external assistance
to provide assistance to the ministry and the EPA.
So one of the really big things for us is that we've been
through Governor's conference where we've been asked
to provide technical, uh, backup to different, um,
uh, different aspects
and technical aspects that have been raised by the governor
to try and narrow issues.
Obviously there's a significant cost involved in this,
but there's no clarity in the act at the moment in terms of
who actually covers those costs.
So we've had difficulties along there in terms of the risk
that we're taking on for rate payers to cover costs
for these fast track applications.
Um, with regard to, uh,
our rate payers in general, we, you know, we,
our rate payers unfortunately are covering for, um,
about 50 additional people per rate payer in terms
of our infrastructure development
and due to the tourism impact
and the peak day requirements that we have.
So our rates are all already, uh, getting very high
and adding more cost in relation to assisting
with this process is very difficult for our rate payers
to, to take on board.
In terms of the reduced timeframes, again, the volume
of the applications that we're dealing
with in the Queensland Lakes District in an area
that's already got really significant growth is a difficult,
um, situation that we have in reducing those timeframes
further would make it even harder for us to assist, uh,
the ministry and the EPA
and obviously we're trying our best to ensure that
N Z's poster child really doesn't end up
with broken teeth and a black eye.
Um, so we're trying to make sure
that growth happens in a reasonable way.
So to be able to assist, um,
with these applications as important to us.
And we would hope that our, uh,
submissions on not changing those, uh,
time periods would be heard
or at least, um, the situation of places like Queenstown
and their uniqueness may be considered through the changes
that are made to the legislation.
Um, again linked to that is the consultation piece,
and if we don't have consultation with applicants,
we don't get an opportunity to front foot the potential, um,
technical advice that we may require
and we don't have the in-house, uh, capability
or capacity to be able to do that.
So if we remove mandatory consultation, it means
that Queensland Lakes District will get these applications
potentially with 15 working days
and to be able to procure, instruct, have availability
and deliver the information required, but to the ministry
and the EPA within that time period, uh, really appears
to be untenable for us.
Um, so the consultation period allows us to get on with
that work to be able to assist the decision makers
with making those decisions moving forward.
Um, second
to last is the section 46 in relation to infrastructure.
This is a significant concern for us
and the wording of the sections is,
is a significant concern.
Also, we have, um, planned infrastructure
as you'll imagine like all areas through our LTP,
we have priority areas set up for the significant amount
of growth that's happening within the district.
We'll be working with central government relating
to those priority areas and spatial planning.
And, um, if we were to have out of sequence infrastructure
or infrastructure that, um, is being developed
through our long-term plan to cater
for these priority areas being consumed by new, um,
fast track applications in the rural environment,
for example, will cause a significant issue for us in terms
of good infrastructure planning
and efficient infrastructure planning.
Um, at the moment this section is, is saying that um,
conditions can be, uh, put in place, uh,
essentially to, uh, have a project, sorry,
that the project would rely on, uh, infrastructure
and that infrastructure needs to be made adequate
to support this new fast track.
That's what the section is saying at the moment,
but there's a question really in terms of
what adequacy means, uh,
because our infrastructure at the moment is dev is obviously
been developed to cater for other areas of growth,
so is adequate.
My question I think is adequate, um,
after those areas are considered and
after the consumption of the existing capacity that we have,
um, has been considered, is it then whether it's adequate
or not, because we would have significant upgrades
to major plants required for these fast track applications.
And the final piece here was just with regard
to affordable housing, obviously there's a significant land
uplift in this district with, um,
fast track applications being developed in areas
where development is not anticipated
and the value of uplift through those developments is such
that we consider, um, helping
to resolve one our key issues here in the district being
affordable housing would be, um, a, a big benefit
to the district, a big benefit to the community.
And uh, in terms
of the people undertaking these applications, um,
the value uplift could be offset against some sort
of contribution to affordable housing.
And that will also be discussed in tomorrow's submission
by the OCL at the Otago Central Lake Lakes, uh,
regional deal set up.
Um, so we hope to go through that.
So look, that's a very quick run through of, um, some
of the aspects of our submission.
I'm happy to take any questions
or give some clarifications if required.
Thank you very much, David, for that submission.
Look, we'll move first to Arina Williams for her question.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank you David.
I'm Arina Williams. I'm a labor mp, um, with responsibility
for consumers and, um, commerce interested in this part.
Um, part of the bill around supermarkets is something
that labor broadly supports.
We wanna see land use freed up, um,
particularly in small cities and regional towns.
Um, and you are one of the areas that I've looked into
as a case study around, um, the sort of critical need
for freeing up land, um, for more food
and grocery businesses that support each other in a network.
Um, then there's all the rest of it
and really interested if we have time for you
to expand a little bit on the cost implications
and how to make this a more properly user paid system
for developers to bear those costs
that you've taken on administratively,
but parking that to one side.
Um, does this go, um, far enough to free up land
and the Queenstown area, particularly the urban center, um,
for development?
Um, should it be available for the existing supermarkets?
Because as you know, um, Queenstown is one of the areas
with very high monopoly concentration
and if we had more of the same plan making, um, use
of these provisions, I don't think that would help, um,
grocery prices to come down.
Have you given thought to how, um, Queenstown council can,
um, assist in providing for more land
for competitors rather than existing players?
Yeah, look, um, in terms of providing more land,
uh, thanks for the question.
We have been working in, in that vein for many years now
through our spatial planning.
We have, um, specific priority areas in each of those areas.
We have, um, land earmarked for supermarket development.
Ladies mile is a good example, just outside of town,
nearly 3000 houses.
There's an area put in there
for supermarket develop development,
but countdown have come in with an application well
before the dev, uh, area will be developed.
Uh, again as you say possibly to secure that land.
We also have the southern corridor, another area
where supermarket has been proposed
to support the development to try
and reduce the traffic impacts, uh, impacts on our roading.
So we're really looking at all our major development
priority areas to have grocery, um, store availability
to uh, essentially have compact and
and efficient planning for those areas.
I haven't considered the aspect of the anti-competitive
or what kind of situations there would be in in other
supermarkets coming to the district,
but certainly I don't, um, I don't
see why a supermarket in this particular district would have
a more difficult time going
through the normal planning process than
it would through the fast track process.
Thank you David. Look, we've got time
for one last quick question.
We'll go to Ryan Hamilton.
Oh, thanks Chair. Uh, thanks for your submission.
I just had a query page three of your submission.
You were a bit worried about the, um, fair
and reasonable costs, so I'm just trying to find it.
Um, the scope
of recoverable costs is currently limited to the actual
and reasonable costs associated.
Isn't that a fairly fair, um, clause to have in the bill?
Why are you worried about changes to that?
What I'm worried about right now is that the, uh,
particular clauses being put into allow for regulations
to be put in place for the cost recovery means
that that could be narrowed.
And you know, we basically are concerned
that the regulations could be made in a way
that narrows Queenstown Lakes district ability to be able
to collect the reasonable costs relating to submitting
to the fast track legislation or any of those applications.
Um, and that's the concern.
Okay, thank you. Thank you very much David.
We have met time and we appreciate your time this morning,
so thank you for that submission.
No problem. Thank you. Thanks very much. Take care.
So we will now move to our next submitter Save the Basin
Campaign Incorporated,
and we welcome back Tim, who we can see right there.
Tim, we will hand it over to you again.
Good Catherine, and thank you.
Yes, I'm, uh, doing double duty this morning,
so wearing a couple of different hats.
So from the,
I'll tell you a little bit about the Save the Basin
campaign, which has in fact previously been
through a fast track process,
but a very different process from this one
because this previous Fast Track process retained the rights
of public participation, the right to comment
and the right to be involved in legal action.
And I'll explain why I think it is so retrograde
for those rights to be further restricted by this bill.
So the Save the Basin Campaign Incorporated is a Wellington
based community group, which is best known for being one
of the organizations that successfully opposed the Basin
Reserve Motorway flyover project, officially known
as the Basin Bridge proposal.
This proposal from the New Zealand Transport Agency was made
public in 2011 and in 2013 went
before a Board of inquiry under a fast track regime put in
place by the previous national government of John Key.
The proposal was rejected by the Board of Inquiry in 2014,
and a subsequent appeal by NZTA
to the high court was rejected in 2015, meaning
that the Basin Reserve fly did not proceed.
The proposed 380 meter long
10 meter high flyover would've been easily visible from the
Basin Reserve, Tess Cricket Ground,
and from many parts of the suburbs of Toyota Mount Victoria
Newtown, and indeed Mount Cook.
Under cross-examination that the Board
of Inquiry hearing cricket experts agreed
that the project posed a threat to the future
of the Basin Reserve as an international cricket ground.
The project was condemned both nationally
and internationally, including on the new,
in the leading international Cricket Site Creek Info.
As the Board of inquiry process also revealed,
it would've led to minimal time savings for traffic.
It is now widely acknowledged
that the Basin Reserve flyover was a very bad idea,
but if not for the rights of public participation,
including the right to be heard at a hearing
that was still present under John Key's fast track regime,
that bad project would've gone ahead save the basin's.
Primary aim is to protect the Basin Reserve
and the environments of the Basin Reserve from bad transport
developments since its formation Save the Basin has been
active in the media in lobbying
and in legal processes,
opposing inappropriate transport proposals and projects at
and near the Basin Reserve.
And we've worked collaboratively with a number
of other community groups and residents association.
Uh, to that end, um,
we participate in the 20 13 14 Board
of Inquiry hearing on the Basin Bridge Project, including
by submitting encouraging members of the public
to submit calling expert witnesses
and participating in cross-examination of witnesses.
And of course, we had legal representation at that hearing.
So as noted, the Board of Inquiry listened carefully
to the evidence, reached its conclusions
and declined resource consent for the Basin Bridge Project.
NZTA appealed to the high court.
They lost on every grounds of appeal.
Now we have a new project being,
which is listed under the Fast Track Approvals Act.
It's called the State Highway one
Wellington Improvements Project.
Um, now I'm not going to go into the merits
of this particular project here except to note,
and there's, I know there's been some, uh, some discussion
of benefit cost ratios, um, in the questions
to recent submissions.
This project is stated by the applicant to have a BCR
of either 1.0 or 1.2 depending on whether it is told.
And of course, a BCR R of one means that
for every dollar spent a dollar is returned, not a great use
of public money Save the basin submits
that we are exactly the type of community organization
that should be welcomed
and enabled to participate in resource consent processes
such as that for the State Highway one Wellington
improvement projects to ensure that bad projects like
that flyover plan do not go ahead while worthwhile projects
of appropriate conditions applied to improve them.
But it seems to us
that the government has learned the wrong lesson
from the defeat of its previous Basin
Reserve flyover proposal.
It should have realized that community input
to the consenting process is vital
to prevent bad projects going ahead
and help fix problems with,
and every project, no matter how good has something in it
that can be improved and community participation helps that.
And it should have realized
that the Fast Track Approvals Act forced through,
despite widespread community opposition in 2024,
is deeply flawed
and is likely to lead to many inadequately designed badly
research projects that are bad for the environment,
for climate and for communities.
And that means they are also bad for our economy.
Instead, however, the government has chosen
to make matters even worse
with this fast track approvals Amendment bill.
There are many negative provisions in this bill,
but in the view of the Save the Basin campaign,
the most invidious are the further restriction on
invitations to comment on proposals
and the removal of appeal rights from such
invited commenters.
The first track approvals Amendment bill if passed further,
imposes ministerial direction, including by the use
of government policy statements
and restricts the right of community participation.
They've already been severely restricted
by the Fast Track Approvals Act.
This attempt to deny communities a say in matters
that affect them will lead to bad blood and bad outcomes.
Communities that have denied the ability
to participate in the legal process will find other means
to oppose projects that adversely affect them,
and it is crucial to retain the right of judicial review.
Therefore, I urge the Environment Select Committee
to reject this bill.
Thanks. Uh, thanks. Um, uh, Tim, I'm,
I'm stepping into chair.
Uh, our current chair has, uh, moved out for, for a period
of time, so thank you very much for that submission
and I'll hand over the first question from Land Farm.
Thanks so much for sharing that past experience
of the failed basin flyover.
I wanted to, um, use that example for you
to hopefully expand for the committee, the difference
between community and local's voice in that situation
and what the position of the council was or wasn't.
Were they in support or otherwise of the flyover and,
and did you know, would they be in a position to adequately,
uh, capture the voices of local residents?
In the case of the, uh, basin Reserve, uh,
flyover proposal council voted by one vote at the time
to support the proposal.
Therefore, clearly council were not representing the views
of those many community groups
and individuals who were opposed to the project.
Now we, I would say, I, I don't that
that is not to say that communities, yes, I,
I wasn't sure whether I should say that was not the vote
of one of the, uh, then council members
who's currently on the committee.
Um, um, which is not to say
that council didn't make some useful points at the hearings,
but it did absolutely not the case
that councils can adequately represent the views
of the community, especially if the Council's position
is not that of the community groups
that seek to be represented.
Now, the Fast Tracked approvals act already severely re you
know, in our view, we should have the right
as everybody should have the right to comment and
therefore to have the legal appeal rights as well.
It's in our view, not adequate as it stands for
that to be at the, uh, discretion of the panel.
But it's even worse with the re further removal
of rights under this amendment.
Bill,
Thank you. Well would
appear there are no more questions.
Tim, we've um, certainly had, uh, the pleasure
of your company quite, quite a bit this morning.
I really appreciate your, uh, submission
and the points you made and your experiences
around the basin campaign.
So, uh, thank you very much and um, thank you for your time
and we'll move on to our next submitter.
Thank you. And that is according to me is
my next submitter is Resource management unit.
We have, um, Mina Mina there,
Kia, you can see me? Yeah.
Yes. There we have, we had you welcome Mina.
Hey look, uh, thank you very
much for your time this morning.
We have your submission. You feel free to take that as read.
You are welcome to make some opening comments.
You have, uh, 10 minutes of our time
and uh, we look forward to hearing what you have to say
and please leave room for questions.
Um, I'd like to follow up from Tim Jones's,
um, presentation.
Mm-hmm. And 100% support him with respect to
his, um, undertakings that, you know, our voice needs
to be heard as a community.
Tin Tenai resource management unit is a community,
um, entity.
Uh, we are kaki out here at, so I just thought,
and council do not hear our voices either.
So although they're there to protect the environment,
we have several issues, um, with council
where they haven't followed up.
Um, and people are literally pushing soil
into the Kaira Harbor.
Um, and building in the coastal marine area,
there are a lot of issues.
There's an ablution block within 10 meters of, of the coast
of the high tide lines.
So these are our issues and council do not address them.
So I thought I'd just put that in there before I start,
but I've just got a, a wee little presentation here.
Um, New Zealand is the size of a pea
compared to countries like America, south America, Africa,
Russia, China, and even our closest neighbors.
Australia. We are small.
This legislation divides that p and allows large
and foreign corporates into our country to stop, to strip,
extract and exploit our RO resources while at the same time
destroying our unique environment.
I appear today on behalf of Tai Resource Management Unit
and I speak as a kaki as someone who carries the wha
and responsibilities of my una.
And as someone deeply connected to the health, wellbeing
and future of the Kaira Harba, it's our
and the Amendment bill a
most importantly, it increases the probability
of high impact projects being placed in environmentally
fragile areas, including the kite catchment,
like the Waste Management mega landfill proposal
that will be cited next to the Hotel River.
The spill is not about efficien efficiency,
it is about removing obstacles.
And those obstacles are the people who protect the ua,
the awa, the tayo, and the future of this country.
Kaira Moana is the largest natural harbor in the world
and the most degraded in every year.
It receives 700,000 tons of sediment as well as nitrates,
phosphates, e coli and forestry runoff.
It cannot take more anything fast tracked
in the Kaira catchment.
Whether it is a landfill mining activity,
earthworks roading, corridors dredging
or energy infrastructure funnels,
its impacts directly into the harbor.
We as kaki are already experienced the loss
of shellfish beds, fisheries habitat for tong with species
and the Maori of our waters.
This amendment bill accelerates that
under the amendment bill even previously declined.
Projects like the Dome Valley
Mega Landfill may reenter the system
through a political pathway rather than
evidence-based pathway.
For the Kyra, this is catastrophic.
The RA is already at tipping point.
Yes, the waste management mega landfill has dragged
through a six year process, not because of red tape, but
because of proposal is fundamentally wrong for this ua.
It sits among wetlands on waterways that feed the EO river
and ultimately the Kaira Moana,
the landfall will destroy 12 kilometers of streams,
will destroy wetlands
and their ecological functions threatens extinction of the
hotch steerers frog, the long tailed and short tail bat
and other toga species will not contain leachate
and contaminants within the site.
Boundary has unstoppable, geologic
and landslip prone terrain has high rainfall.
Catchments is within proximity to aquifers
and groundwater recharge zones has inadequate buffer zones,
has stormwater system vulnerability has uncertain methane
and greenhouse gas emissions includes biodiversity.
Displacement will remain hazardous for centuries
and has so many scientific
and technical anomalies that it cannot
credibly called environ environmentally safe.
The Dome Valley owners waste Management have already said
they will go through the fast track approval system
to get approvals for this dump that sits on the Kaira Harba.
Our awa are the arteries of the kaira.
If we poison the awa, we poison the harba.
If we silence hapu, we silence the very people
who carry generations of knowledge about these waterways.
Our awa are not drainage systems. They are ancestors.
They are living beings. They carry our whakapapa.
This amendment bill treats them as collateral damage.
Likewise, Papa Nuku is exposed to intensified mining,
uncontrolled earthworks, large style extraction, loss
of biodiversity and cumulative harm that is not accounted
for anywhere in this legislation.
You cannot fast track your way out of ecological collapse.
You can only accelerate it.
Our P lp, our New Zealand
possesses the most unique, fragile
and pr irreplaceable natural environments on earth.
It has taken billions of years to form
and it is a small parcel of uniqueness.
To open this parcel to the world would be an injustice
to the future generations.
What should, what should be a land that supports its people
with food and security will become a dis desolate lump
of earth that rely on
outside corporates for survival.
That is the bigger picture that I see.
It is already happening today.
Instead of being able to go into the kaira
for food, there is none.
Kaira was na food basket.
Now countdown is naati fat's food basket.
We no longer walk along the shore to get our food,
but we walk along the aisles.
What life are we going to leave our future generations?
They will hate us for it. To the committee.
I say this respectfully but firmly.
The cannot take more.
Our awa cannot take more, our UA cannot take more,
our climate cannot take more,
and our una deserve better.
I close with the word she, with me
through deida from Ku Dam.
Um, Avish, when you see something wrong in front of you,
you must correct it.
If you do not, you become the wrong. This amendment.
Bill is wrong. Please decline it.
Uh, thank you very much. We have
a question from Land Farm.
Thank you so much for your submission. Very clear.
My question was, um, just around in one of your final,
uh, recommendations.
You're saying if the bill is to pass, um,
then there's some minimum amendments that you would expect.
And you mentioned the inclusion of prohibited activities.
In the eligibility criteria.
Are you referring to, um,
prohibited activities outlined in say like
district or regional plans?
And can you give us an idea about what, what kind of things,
um, that would mean for your community?
I'm just gonna have a look for that.
Yeah, sure. It was just, um, on the, on page six
and under seven, down the bottom recommendations,
it was number five, inclusion
of prohibited activities in the ineligibility criteria.
You
Prohibit prohibited activities.
I probably meant permitted activities, sorry.
And under the district plan, um, permitted activities,
um, I don't know why I put prohibited,
but with respect to the permitted activities,
there are a lot of permitted activities in,
in the district plan that adversely affect our, um,
coastal marine area.
Um, one of them is the ability to move soil, like I said,
5,000 cubic meters, um,
around in the coastal marine area.
Um, a lot of activities including building.
There's uh, someone who has built a shed
in a protected wetland, it's protected by a covenant
and council has, um, deemed it a permitted activity.
Just those permitted activities are the ones that I probably
uh, refer to.
Okay, thank you.
Thank, thanks. Look, um, thanks very much, um, man.
Um, really appreciate your time today and your submission.
And, uh, we'll now move on to our next submitter, uh,
taro Iron Sand Limited.
I understand Stephanie is online.
Yes. Thank you Chair.
I'm just turning my video on so you can see.
Cool. Excellent. Alright, morning, Stephanie.
You have, uh, 10 minutes with us today.
We have your submission. Feel free to take it as read.
You're welcome to make some opening comments.
It'd be great if you leave time
for a few questions. Thank you.
Sure. Thank you. Uh, so just by way of introduction,
my name's Stephanie Dere.
I am a partner at Minter Ellison.
Brad Watts in the environment team.
And, um, I'm representing Taro Iron Sands Limited,
who has made a submission on the bill.
Uh, taro Iron Sands Limited operates the Taro Iron Sand
mine, which is adjacent to Taua Village, uh,
on the west coast of the north island.
It's south of, um, south of Kaia.
So the mine has actually been in operation
for over 50 years.
It was originally established by the New Zealand government,
um, that has now been operated, uh, privately
by Taro s Sands.
And it is also situated on, uh, Maori land.
Uh, so the Maori land owners, uh, lease the land
to Taro s Sands, uh,
taro s Sands has three projects which are listed in
schedule, uh, two of the act.
Uh, and it has recently applied for, uh, approvals for one
of those projects, which is currently subject to, um,
completeness checks by the EPA.
So that process is, um, being undergoing, uh,
undertaken at the moment.
Um, so Taro Einsteins has a vested, uh,
interest in the fast track approvals, uh, act at,
made a submission on the bill, uh,
and, uh, is particularly interested in the amendments which
are being proposed through this bill.
Uh, generally, uh, Terah Aand, uh,
supports the changes which are being proposed
through this bill, uh, in respect of those which will, um,
seek to alter the process
and also apply to the application stage prior to, um,
actually lodging an application
for consideration by the panel.
Taro Isaid strongly supports the intent
and purpose of the bill to facilitate
and speed up the development, um, of infrastructure.
Uh, the development of infrastructure
and development projects, uh, in New Zealand, uh,
that have significant regional or national benefits.
Taro Einstein's experience with the Resource Management Act,
uh, in those consenting processes is that they have been,
uh, slow, very costly
and has created a lot of investment uncertainty, uh,
for the operation of the mine.
So one of the projects, the one which TIL has applied for,
uh, under the, under the act, relates to two blocks
of the mine, the central and southern blocks.
Uh, this is to replace existing consents
and for it to continue its operations into the future.
Um, the mine has significant regional
and national benefits, um,
and TIL wants to obtain additional consents to enable it
to continue operating.
It has had a long history of consenting, um,
for those particular blocks under the RMA, um, some, um,
uh, six years or so, which is why it has looked
to the fast track approvals.
Uh, bill, so if I just, that's just by way of background.
Um, in the submission you will see
that Taro Einstein supports, uh, the changes which are made
to the process elements of, um, of the bill, uh,
in particular clarifying
and narrowing pre-application consul consultation
requirements, uh, focus on expedient appointment
of panel panel members
and processing of applications, flexible approach
to completeness checks,
and also to modifications to applications
limiting the parties that can be invited
to comment on an application
and which have appeal rights where there would be overlap
otherwise with council, uh, feedback on an application
requiring panels to have regard to the government's decision
to list a project in Schedule two on the basis that it is
for that reason that an applicant has invested in the fast
track approval system, enabling an applicant
to comment on the composition of a panel
and for panel members to collectively have the skills in the
relevant sector, which is particularly relevant when you
have an application, uh, in the sector,
which is highly technical
and will require some background knowledge, uh, to enable
a good understanding of the activities for which, uh,
approvals are being sought.
And also Taura Einstein supports them in being able
to direct the EPA where that is appropriate.
So there was one submission point in particular
where Taura Einstein submitted that it thought
that the amendments could go slightly further,
which is in relation
to the pre-application consultation requirements.
Ro Einstein supports consultation
and is a regular part of its business, especially given
that it's been operating for many years,
however, has found the pre-application consultation
requirements to be, um, unclear about
what is required in terms of consultation.
Uh, and also quite extensive.
It has me, it means that many months are required, um,
to prepare an application.
And overall it creates a lot of, it has created a lot
of uncertainty about what is required for an application
to be accepted as complete.
The changes which are proposed to those requirements
by the bill will mean that consultation is still required
with Marine and coastal area applicants.
Uh, however, uh,
rah Einstein submits that, uh,
the changes which have been made
to consultation requirements in respect
of the other parties were notices issued.
And 20 working days is
provided, is required for those parties
to provide feedback is also extended to maca applicant's.
Now, this approach would be consistent
with the requirements under the Resource Management Act,
where there is no pre-application, uh,
consultation required,
even though an applicant can still choose to do that.
Uh, and also under the Marine
and Coastal Area Act, there is no consultation requirement,
but there is a notification requirement.
So that doesn't mean that consultation can't be undertaken,
it just provides applicants with that flexibility
and the certainty
and the ability to lodge an application with the certainty
that an application will be accepted, uh,
and reduces the risk of, uh, uncertainty associated
with judicial review and the like,
which could be filed in relation to an application.
So that was the key point I wanted to focus on.
Um, but I see there's some questions,
so I'll leave a couple of minutes.
Thank you, Stephanie. Our
first question from Rachel Brooking. Thank you, Rachel.
Thank you. Um, hopefully you can hear me on my phone here.
Good. I've got, uh, two questions
and one is, uh, the panel conveners have told us
that they're very worried about complex projects, uh,
being decided in 60 days,
and they won't get, uh, panelists to agree to do them
and they won't be able to do robust decisions, and
therefore they'll be open to judicial review.
Uh, do you disagree
with the panel conveners is the first question.
Uh, and the second one is about the directions
by the minister to the EPA,
and you've said we are appropriate,
and your submissions says that there's clear
that there's been some dis uh, dissonance.
Uh, what sort
of things are you thinking would be appropriate
for the minister to direct the EPA on?
No, thank you. Uh, so just to clarify,
can you just trigger me again what your first question was?
It was whether or not you disagreed
with the panel conveners who have told us very clearly
that there's limited numbers of people to do those roles
and that it will be too fast
and there will be judicial review,
which will slow everything down.
Understood. So the, there's a couple
of points which I think, um, go to that, um, that issue.
So, uh, in the first case, um, an application is required
to have, um, an extensive amount of information included
in the actual application pack, which, um,
the panel will be able to use to inform its decisions.
Uh, if there is, um,
some complexity which arises along the way,
I understand the applicant will still have the ability
to put the application on hold if necessary.
So I know that won't be something that the panel will,
the panel, uh, will have the right to do,
but the applicant will.
Um, but overall, the purpose
and intention of this act is to enable decisions
to be made promptly to speed up the delivery
of infrastructure and development, uh, in New Zealand.
And, um, I in particular for Taro Einstein's project,
um, this application has already been
through a resource management process.
It's well developed
and it should be able to be considered relatively promptly.
Um, I don't have a sp specific submission on whether, um,
you know, 60 days or slightly longer might be appropriate,
but there are mechanisms in place under the bill,
which should enable a panel to make
informed decisions within a condensed timeframe.
Uh, the application, like I said, will have a lot
of information it can draw on
and, um, seek experts, um, to provide it
with feedback on the application, which should enable it
to make a robust decision quickly.
The second point you raised was around, sorry,
The, the EPA
and what you expect the minister to be able to make,
um, directions on.
So I, I am, so RA's submission is
that it would be helpful, um, particularly
where there is a lack of clarity in the legislation, um,
around particular process requirements.
It would be helpful for the minister to be able
to direct the EPA about what was intended in respect
of those, um, specific elements of the legislation.
I understand that this bill, um, is addressing some
of those, um, areas of uncertainty generally.
Um, and so it, I would submit that it's appropriate
for the minister to be able to provide the EPA
with clarity about what was intended, if that's necessary.
Okay. Thank you. Um, you've, uh, that, that's, uh,
brings your submission to a close.
Thank you, Stephanie. I really appreciate your time.
Thank you. And we'll move on to the next minute. Thank you.
Thank you. And the next minute should be, uh,
Taranaki Energy Watch or Sarah Roberts.
Can you, I'm apologizing. I was on mute.
Okay. It's okay. Not the first person to do that.
I know. Sorry about that.
No, uh, welcome Sarah, welcome to the, um,
environment Select Committee.
This morning. We look, you have 10 minutes, um,
to present your submission.
Uh, we, you can feel free to take the, um, submission
as read and, uh, um, make some opening comments and,
but be great if you leave time
for a few questions. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Um,
Taranaki Energy Watch is a longstanding grassroots community
based here in Tar Taranaki.
And I just wanna point out that in my submission
to the original bill, I attached it to this one,
but it actually hasn't appeared
because some of the evidence that I want
for my talk today is there.
So I'd like to be able to apply, um, to the committee
to take that into account.
I can forward it. Again.
The two aspects I want to, uh, talk to today are
around community and hapu involvement
and the length of time for complex cases.
And, um, our group has a lot of experience with dealing
with hearings and environment court
court cases over the years.
We have recently in the last decade
engaged in submitting on district and coastal plans.
While they're not resource consents, they are part
of the same, uh, approach through the RMA
and, um, publicly notified resource consents as well.
And we are currently involved in an environment court case,
uh, for the proposed new PLIs district plan,
and in a high court case for a resource consent
that's gone through to high court.
Um, these have been occurring or have occurred in Tara,
but they've created case law across New Zealand
that affects other aspects of similar facilities.
We predominantly focus on oil
and gas facilities by our name, energy Watch,
but a lot around fertility risk
and, um, injury from community living beside them.
In all these cases, we have had expert evidence
provided by our community who have fundraised
and the applicants and councils experts, and have,
consequently, we believe having them involved has pro
produced findings that can be applied across
all jurisdictions.
As a community group, we've, um, lobbied well gone out
to our communities that are involved
and put forward our, um, case to take,
and they have fundraised
and we have received considerable donations from
them to support the cases.
We have an interest in these
because these cases occur in our communities, next
to our families and our friends and our neighbors.
So that's how our group has been involved in these cases.
I outlined there have been different defendable outcomes
because of the involvement
of community groups right from the start.
So in my initial submission from Energy Watch
to the bill itself, we have outlined some of those cases.
The case against Energy Watch versus South Taranaki District
Council covered oil and gas activities
and sensitive activities where they were incompatible
and we helped craft objectives, policies,
and rules that avoided unacceptable fatality risk
and injury to the community.
I have to say from the outside outset, the council
and the com companies did not do this.
This was the involvement of the communities
that achieved this outcome
through the district council hearings
and environment court process,
our experts hazardous substances and risk legal
and planning argued this position
and won a high level
of technical expertise is required for this type of work.
The process would've been unable
to be completed within 60 days due to the complexity
of the case and also the availability
of the appropriate experts.
Similarly, in our case, against the regional council
for the Coastal plan, we argued against the position
of the council and of the companies where they put forward
that it was a controlled activity in the open waters
and non-comp complying in the outstanding natural areas
for oil and gas, um, exploration and production.
In that case, we gained more experts
to there from the community.
We, we fundraised, we brought them in
and we argued the position that they shouldn't be controlled
because they can't, cannot be turned down.
They should be at least restricted discretionary with a lot
of, um, standards involved in that in the open waters.
And we achieved prohibited in the outstanding actual areas.
Now, again, I believe if the community had not been involved
and brought their viewpoint
to the table, we weren't frivolous.
We bought a case and we won the case.
And so, again, I support, this was a very complex case
and it also would've taken,
it did take much longer than 60 days
because of the requirement of having those experts.
And finally, just a couple of more cases
that we've been involved in, remediation New Zealand is a,
um, or organic composting facility
that we have challenged the renewal of their consents
as community.
They have been through the district council hearing,
the resource consents were turned down.
They've been through, um, uh, environment court hearing.
The resources were consents were turned down
and we are now in front of the high court.
The community is still there.
We are interested in
what is happening in our own communities.
We are interested in having policy
and rules that not only,
obviously we cannot turn these com um, these companies away,
but we are interested in making sure that it is done
to the best possible outcome for all sides.
We are not in support
of the way the Fast Track bill has gone through.
We're not in support of the amendment bill either.
In these cases that we've been involved, we want
to make sure that communities are engaged,
that people realize how complex some of these cases
that are being brought board are,
and how even with the best intention in the world
that experts that we need
for these cases cannot always be found in the
timeframes that required.
And it's actually difficult.
I noticed Rachel Brooking asked those questions earlier.
It's actually very difficult to predict
how long it will take when certain types
of experts are required on all sides to present evidence.
And I believe we run a huge risk
of undermining the system if we allow it
to go ahead in that way.
Sorry, I rushed through 10 minutes. Got a lot to say.
Thank you very much. That's, uh, great, Sarah, thank you.
Now is there any questions from the panel this morning?
Uh, LAN Lan Farm. Thank you
Sarah, thank you so much for your very clear submission
and especially the aspects where you are demonstrating
the gap between community understanding
and what council might advocate.
My my question was, um, particularly
with you in Taranaki where there's a number
of fast track projects, how would your group
and the community that you are involved with
feel about essentially even those projects
that are currently entrain?
And I'm thinking, um, Taranaki Seabed mining for one,
uh, proposal that administer could then come in
with A-A-G-P-S statement
that actually directs some outcome with that project
that would, that then the panel would have to consider,
even though they're already in process.
What would be the community response to that? I,
I imagine there would be some outrage.
I think that having produced in our cases,
obviously we haven't worked in that case,
but in the cases we have having produced experts
that we have gone to,
and obviously they're independent experts as well,
that we've gone to with our concerns
and the independent experts have produced work that set,
that presents that there is flaws in what is being produced
by the council and the, the companies, then we would be
quite devastated if the, if those types
of expertise was not taken into consideration
and A GPS was drawn up that didn't represent those matters.
Mm. Thank, thank Youlan, um, uh, Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Uh, Sarah, thank thanks for your submission.
Could you give us some examples of the types of experts you,
you've dealt with and used?
You, you've said the word experts quite a lot of time,
but can you just add, add a bit of color to that? Thanks.
Okay, so we, we used, um, a hazardous substances
and risk expert who special specializes in particularly oil
and gas, but all kinds of significant hazardous facilities
because the work that we've done has extended now from oil
and gas to all significant hazardous facilities
and the plans that are being written.
And they cover everything from fatality consequence through
to fatality risk,
and the same with injury consequence through to injury risk
as well for all kinds of, uh, infrastructure that has
that element to it.
We've also involved air experts who have worked on odor
and noxious tox, toxic, um, uh,
substances over the boundary to do related to air.
We've also worked with legal
and planning experts that lean themselves to that.
So they all work together.
Well, thank, thank you very much.
Oh, Sarah, just, um, you, you raised your, uh, head issues
with trying to get part of your submission in the clerk will
be in touch to organize to get
that information through to us. Okay.
And, and can I check that, uh, are we allowed
to submit our speaking notes, the ones
that I've just spoken to directly today?
I'm sure there's no trouble with that. Okay.
We're being recorded, but feel free. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you very much. Okay.
Thank you very much. Um, we'll move on to our next minute.
Thank you very much for your time. Thank you.
Move on to our next submitter, which is a call action ku.
And we should have Jenny Campbell,
uh, coming online.
Ah, there we go. Hello, Jenny,
You a Koto.
K And good morning Jenny. Um, just welcome
to the Environment Select Committee
and the submission process here.
Uh, we have, um, we've, we, we received your submission.
Feel free to take it as read.
You are welcome to, um, uh, make a few comments.
You have 10 minutes. It'd be great if you can leave
a bit of time for a few questions.
Thank you very much. Thank you
Ua.
Thank you for the chance to speak
to the select committee members on this proposed fast track
approvals amendment bill I'm submitting as convene
of coal action ku, uh, we shortened to cam along
with personal perspectives.
We are southern people who have seen the disastrous impacts
of coal mining in our KU rawhi over many years.
We operate under right under the COPA
of Coal Action Network, uh, to Aurora.
As you heard from Tim Jones earlier this morning,
thank goodness Bathhurst has dropped its plans
to open up a new coal mine
and nightcaps a very low socioeconomic town
as a result of coal mining.
There over many decades has been a
disaster for the people there.
We, as Cam members recommend
that this bill should not be passed because it was proposed.
Further impact on our kopa
and our pre precious Tonga, both flora
and fauna, which are particularly valued here in KU
by cam members, AKA eor.
We are all in this together tii.
This proposed amendment Bill shows little consideration
for honoring and giving acknowledgement of te ti
or wa ti principles.
Bring with them the essential need to fully consult
with Maori and the COPA around solutions
and understanding of our need
to work together on a consultative basis
to preserve our unique endemic species,
especially in our national parks, reserves,
and on other types of conservation land
tga defendants long term wisdom
from their lived experience here as their first nation.
People must be valued
as they will have their mana trampled on if there is another
round of rushing with this amendment bill.
Crown policy must give full effect to ti in involving
and consulting with Maori, as well as measures
to enable iwi, hapu, and whanau to exercise their Ranga
and kaki role in respect of tanga within their rawhi.
The timeframe of 60 days makes consultation
with Iwi an almost impossible aspect to achieve
connection with ua.
With all this rush to push through large
projects which desecrate our precious
and unique ua, we are forgetting
that these tanga species are not only a source
of so-called economic resources out to be mined, polluted
and destroyed, such as through coal mining,
big dams and seabed mining.
But they're also sources out of our connection
with wellbeing and our spirituality.
They're also the homes for so many endangered species.
This is especially relevant on the dentist Denton Plateau,
which I visited after Easter this year.
The theme for the Hui was Denton two precious to mine,
so true Bathurst and tends to open cast mine
and export the coal for, for this Australian company.
So profits are going overseas.
Many species found there are very endangered
and some found nowhere else in the world.
For example, the avatar moth, a large snail palant, Patrick
Pep, Peppe poi, the forest Ringlet butterfly
and others alongside West Coast Forest, wetter
coral, great spotted Kiwi, west coast green gecko, as well
as many endangered plants.
All of this would be destroyed completely
by open cast mining a disaster
for these organisms and the coast.
Generally, Bathurst has a terrible reputation
of not doing adequate remediation, leaving them mess behind.
Cleanup then has
to be done using our taxpayers funds responsibility.
Our main emphasis is on our moral
and ethical responsibility
for these organisms which do not
have a voice for themselves.
Can members advocate for us all to be a voice for nature?
But this amendment bill further wipes away any respect
and care for to our precious planet future generations.
These proposed new restrictive regulations have total
disregard for future generations, not just of people.
We ask, does this government care about your
and others Una grandchildren along with other
valuable endemic species?
As a great grandmother with B Papa Maori,
I look at these beautiful young people expecting us
to use our wisdom and knowledge for their wellbeing.
What kind of planet are we leaving them with to deal
with extreme weather events which are becoming more
prevalent even as we speak international,
international standing.
Not only will these ru rush processes endanger our endemic
and unique living heritage of flora and fauna,
but also our standing nationally and internationally.
Panels will be forced to approve
or reject major projects within just 60 working days.
Regardless of how complex
or environmentally risky the proposal is, government needs
to have strong review criteria so that projects which showed
possible dangerous impacts on people's
and the environment's health can be canceled.
This proposed legislation means we will not be able
to meet our Paris Agreement commitments, particularly
through not getting out of fossil fuels coal,
especially alongside reducing methane emissions.
If we don't do this, it will have drastic consequences
for RT o on the world scene.
Oops. Excluding public participation is not
what is expected in a democracy.
The chance for the public
to appeal destructive decisions at the high court has been
further restricted, taking away democratic processes.
Interference, read the panel decisions is a serious
injustice of our de democratic principles as well.
We as cam members oppose the fast track amendment bill
and expect that it will be rejected
because of the harm it will bring to ro,
which we have outlined in our submission.
Fki Uri look back
and reflect so we can move forward here.
It may be small, but it is very precious. Ran.
Thank you very much, Jenny.
Uh, we have a question from, uh, Celia, we Brown.
Uh, Jenny John
Celia, Thank you for your strong defense of t
and people too.
Um, I had a question in, um,
one part of your submission.
You say that anything that's been rejected
through the fast track, um, act should not be eligible
to go through this.
I'd just like to ask you to expand on that,
whether you also think that anything that he's has been
rejected under previous legislation, not for in, not
for insufficient information, but if it's been rejected
because it's environmental effects outweigh any other
benefits, um, should it also be
ineligible for this process?
So the zombie projects,
Most definitely, yes.
Once they've done, once they've been rejected
and presented all their information,
why should they then be allowed to give it another push
with a much more, um, uh, in, in a much more
hurried, um, space where they don't have
to present maybe all that information
that they did previously.
They should have got their act together when they first
presented it and the not get a second chance.
Thank, thank you. Uh,
Um, thanks so much for being here today
and for your very strong clear submission.
One of the really concerning aspects of these, uh,
this amendment bill is the assumption that council views
will be able to capture and reflect those of the community
and those in the community voice.
What has been your own experience in working with groups,
uh, and aka over many years about whether council is
adequate in representing community view?
Community views are very varied and,
and especially if you live in the place
that's being affected by the proposed, um,
whatever the propo, whatever the, um, project is,
we are living in the space and have to deal with the dust
and the noise and the lights
and, you know, all those kind of side impacts as well
as seeing things like, um,
nature native species being destroyed
before our very eyes, things that we hold precious
and are unique to our particular community.
So council people cannot present all of those perspectives.
We near from need to hear from the hearts of the people
who are going to be affected.
Thank you. Um, thank Youlan. Thank, thank you Jenny.
I really appreciate your submission.
We've, um, um, made our time with you today.
Um, so you have a great day and, um,
and, and thank you very much.
You're alright. Thank you. We'll move on
to our next submitter, climate Justice Taranaki.
Um, we'll just see till they come up online.
Kira Kura. So I'm guessing for this Dr.
Lindon Dia and Catherine Chang. Is that correct? Right.
Thank you. Well, welcome everybody.
Uh, welcome for the, um, uh, environment Select committee.
We have, uh, 10 minutes with you today.
Uh, we've, um, received your submission.
Feel free to take it as red,
but you're welcome to make few opening comments.
It'd be great if you could
leave a bit of time for questions.
Okay. Yes. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you Chair, and thank you everybody.
Um, well, climate Justice Taranaki, our group's been
around since 2010.
Um, so we are group, we are focusing on climate change
and social justice and the interactions between the two.
And increasingly we are really concerned about the
so many planetary boundaries that we have already breach not
to be the ecological crisis that is being accelerated by
hasty decisions for projects.
And many of those under this legislation are destructive.
And our experience in the fast track hearing on the Seabed
Mining proposal down in the south Taranaki by
has been humbling, really.
We heard, um, witnesses on from the community's iwi hapu.
And the amount of knowledge that is, that is oozing out,
you know, in the, in the presentations is, is huge.
And to ignore those
or to take the rights of people who know, you know, dearly,
their, their backyard, their oceans
to take those rights away is, is really, um, really sad.
So I just wanna say, and Lyndon
and I both have ecological, we, we are ecologists,
so we do see linkages vary all the time.
And, um, um,
I just don't wanna see another piece of legislation
that would, that would, you know, that doesn't give time
to properly, to properly assess the impacts,
ecological impacts
and social economic impacts of, of projects, um,
being decisions being made on them in a,
in a hasten way is, um, Dr.
Di will talk some more.
Uh, yeah. Tina Kato Kato, uh, thank you so much, uh,
to the, uh, to the, uh,
select committee for listening to us.
Look, it's pretty clear that we opposed this bill,
we opposed the act, uh, prior to that.
Uh, you know, I think what
what what's missing here is an understanding that, uh,
Herman Daley, uh, one of the chief economists
for the World Bank was very clear about,
and it's been said many times, even today, uh, that, um,
the economy is a wholly owned subsidiary of the environment.
If we do not understand that very basic principle,
then we will continue to go down this business as usual,
or business as, uh, you know, ramped up approach.
And a, uh, as many submitters previously,
we are very supportive of the PCE Forest
and Bird submission, uh, the Choose Clean Water.
Uh, people this morning were very clear as to the damages
and the costs that are likely to accrue from the, uh,
the irrigation and the nitrate, uh, issues in,
uh, the South island.
Uh, and, you know, it wasn't for lack of warning, ECAN was,
was warned back in 2000 by their scientists
that there were nitrate issues.
That's 25 years ago.
Uh, as, as people would understand here,
the ecan was subsequently sacked and, uh, and replaced.
Uh, and the irrigation schemes have continued at pace, uh,
with, um, you know, uh, significant future costs to,
uh, New Zealand.
So we are very concerned in terms of the rush timeframes.
We think that that will deeply erode, uh, the capacity
of panels to make, uh, wise decisions.
We're also extremely concerned about the exclusion
of civil society
and NGOs from the process, uh, the, the people
that are going to bear the costs of damage.
We are also, uh, concerned, uh, about the policy statements
to that may be made to EPA
and to the panel, uh, that, um, that's an erosion
of democracy in our, in our view.
Uh, the, the fast tracking
of fossil fuels is a particular concern
of climate justice Taranaki.
Uh, given that that's one of our core, one
of our core concerns is that, um,
the evidence has been clear for decades, if not centuries,
that this is the wrong thing
to be doing at this point in time.
And to be expediting coal mining,
particularly in incredibly, uh, important, uh,
environmental areas.
And given the, the, the disgraceful record of extinction
and threatened species that New Zealand sadly has, uh,
is totally counterproductive to a sensible approach
to the future for this nation.
Uh, and it also risks, um, uh, uh,
the government violating the, um, the, the recent, uh,
the recent, uh, opinion that was given
by the International Court of Justice that pointed out
that governments have a responsibility, uh, in terms
of climate disruption.
Uh, our government at present, uh, is not, uh,
acting responsibly in that regard.
So I think we'll leave it there. Uh, one last thing, sorry.
Cost benefit analysis.
Uh, the, the issue there is that it should be a net benefit,
and it is not an easy thing to assess the value
of ecosystem services.
They're self-evident once they've been disrupted, and,
and water quality is a clear example of that.
Uh, we, we underestimate
and we struggle to, uh, properly account for the services
that are provided by healthy ecosystems,
and that is at severe risk, uh, in a process that is limited
to just 60 days.
Our experiences with the, uh,
the trans Tasman resources hearing the panel, uh, made,
uh, good efforts to try to engage with, uh,
the many concerns that iwi hapu, uh,
NGOs civil society.
There was a three day conferences held in horror, uh,
and it was, um, it was very clear that there are many,
many issues in these complicated projects that,
as you would be aware, was a zombie project
that had been knocked back by the high court, uh,
and then the Supreme Court.
So, uh, look, obviously we're opposed to this.
Uh, we think that it should be repealed if it,
if it does go get through, which we expect it will.
Uh, and, uh, we'll leave it at that.
Happy to answer questions. Thank
You very much. We have a
question from, uh, Celia Wade Brown. Celia
Ken ua.
Um, thank you Chair.
I, I had a question, um, really about the
supposed reasons for the bill, um, in terms of jobs
and economic development.
Um, and I'm interested in your taranaki wide
sort of response.
Mm-hmm. Do you see that there are a number of opportunities
for sort of positive industrial service,
other kinds of jobs, if there's a rather different approach
to investment choices?
So it's not, or no jobs,
No. Well experience,
um, from Taranaki is
that the fossil fuel industry,
it benefits some business in town,
but definitely not where the wells are drag, uh, are drilled
and fracked or where the drilling wastes are being spread.
In fact, those communities, uh, uh,
very deprived economically.
Um, another thing is, I, I think we,
we really have should get back to the basics.
What, what do communities really need?
What are really urgent, what are so-called regional
and national benefit?
Our point of view is that we should put so much more
emphasis, investment and priority on local
healthy food production for diversified agriculture,
food production for, for New Zealand.
Also distributed renewable energy at the community level so
that we are not relying on, on, on mining more coal,
importing coal or drilling for gas
or building, um, an NG terminal, um,
in our port, which will just drive
electricity prices skyrocketing high.
So we, we need to get back down to
what is really the community needs.
So, which is, um, yeah, food
and also we're gonna need money for climate adaptation,
affordable housing.
So yeah, it's definitely not those big scale industrial
extractive projects. And,
Uh, the job numbers are usually inflated, uh,
when the these proposals are, are put forward.
And, uh, you know, in, in most cases
that in my experience at least, uh, the numbers
of jobs are far less than what are, what are, uh, promoted.
Okay. Thank you. Well,
it looks like we've, um, pretty much met time.
No more questions. Um, uh, thank you both
for your time this morning.
Really appreciate it. And, um, have a great day.
Thank You. Thank you, yo.
Alright, we'll move on to our next submitter, which is te
So I'm making submissions on behalf
of the Maori Law Society today. Um,
Just before you, just before you start, just quickly,
I'll just lay out the ground rules.
Um, you've got 10 minutes of our time welcome.
Um, you, we've, you feel free to take your submission
as read, um, and make a few comments.
We'd be greatly have time for a few
questions far away, mate.
Absolutely. And I've, I've, um, not intended to go
through the submission verbatim today.
I have a quick summary. Right. That's great.
That would be great. Thank you.
If you move straight into, um, to questions, um, there,
I think there's a little bit of a delay.
Um, so please just bear with me if, if my answers
to questions or anything are a little bit, um, delayed.
So, uh, URA Maori have made submissions, um,
and they've said that the,
the way the government have advertised, um,
this amendment bill is basically just containing technical
mechanical changes, um,
aimed at approving efficiencies in the primary act,
but also in relation to supermarket
and grocery projects, um, is not accurate.
And Maori have said
that these changes are actually far from that.
They are substantive structural changes
that significantly affect Maori participation, um,
in the processes under the fast track legislation, um,
but also affect natural justice principles
and that constitutional balance
of environmental decision making.
Each of the proposed, um, changes
or the issues that we've outlined in our submission
by themselves highlight breaches of te
and contribute to the erosion of the, uh,
Maori crown relationship.
But when the proposals, um,
and the changes are taken together, particularly
as they relate to what we've said is the overreach
of the executive into the EPAs quasi-judicial
and critically independent function, it raises serious alarm
for TE Maori
and a sense of UNE at the inevitable impact, um,
that this will have, uh, on Maori, um,
particularly those groups that are not
provided with avenues for participation under
the primary legislation.
And through this bill I'm talking about marai, whanau, uh,
marai, uh, land trusts
and whanau with bespoke issues in particular areas
of land or Tonga.
The suites of changes, uh, will follow this pattern we say
of subordinating Maori rights and interests
and curtailing Maori involvement in decision making
that affects the environment, their Tonga, uh,
their wide water and UA or land.
And in addition to that, uh,
and what we've actually heard this morning in some
of the submissions is that, um,
this will call into question the overall legitimacy
of any process under this and the primary act
and heighten, I think the, the loss of trust, um,
in fast checking generally.
Um, there are a number of issues
that we've outlined in the submission.
Uh, the two that are quite critical are the access
to justice issues, um,
and natural justice principles, um, that we see
as being absent from this bill,
including the limitation on the appeal rights, um, the kind
of preference that people use the judicial review, um,
pathway, noting of course there are issues
with judicial review in terms of its complexity and cost,
but also the compressed timeframes.
And then there are those three, um, there are three examples
that we've given in terms of this, uh, pointing out
or defining what we've said as an executive overreach,
and that's in the way, um, the bill provides
for a government policy statement, um, amendments to the,
um, schedule of projects through orders
of council rather than, uh, referring those
or recourse back to parliament for that oversight.
Um, and in particular, the, the ability for the minister
to give directions to the EPA on its functions in power,
um, noting of course that the EPA is exercising
that quasi-judicial and independent function.
So those are kind of, those are general summary statements
of our submissions and I'm happy to move to questions.
Great. We have a question from Land Farm.
Thank you so much for that submission.
Um, I wanted to ask specifically as you know, practitioners
of law, because we've heard really concerning, um, comments,
particularly from the fast track conveners
who actually put together the fast track panels about
how small the pool of practitioners are
who might be available to sit on these panels.
Mm-hmm. And we heard from them, you know, various, uh,
responses from panel members
and chairs that either they would not sit
in such a constrained, uh, period, or they wouldn't sit
because it could, for example,
risk reputational damage in their opinion.
Have you, uh, within Maori Law Society,
have you had conversations about this?
Can you help us understand what your perspective might be?
Absolutely. So, um, the, the first issue for te Maori in
that respect is that, um, not only is there
a small pool of people that would look to do this,
but the pool is actually much smaller in terms
of those experts.
Um, whether that be ma Maori
or ma uh, legal issues from a Maori perspective
or environmental planning expertise from a ma Maori
perspective, that pool of people is even smaller.
Um, and the, basically what you've described is
what we've heard from many of those people is
that one being involved in these fast tracking panels, um,
with a regime that basically puts tight constraints on the
way that they're able to administer their function, um, is
concerning both because that they think they're not able
to do a robust job, um,
and do a proper job to ensure
that environmental issues are addressed from a to
to Maori perspective.
Um, and the reputation issue that you mentioned
as well was also very much prevalent.
And, uh, we, we've found it hard to find anyone that's keen
to sit on these panels for those reasons.
Um, those that are keen, are keen from a, from a, uh,
from a perspective that, um, if the regime is going to be
so, I guess, uh,
harsh on providing for Maori and their rights
and interests, that it may be the only avenue
for those rights and interests to have a gateway into being,
um, raised throughout the process as a legitimate issue, um,
being triggered by the legislation or by one project.
So, um, but that group of people is very small
because of those other issues that I've just described.
K I've got another question. If we've got time chair,
You're far, far away, LA go for it.
Um, you mentioned about the amendments potentially
causing more risk to the legitimacy
of the decisions that are made.
And I understand, you know, from a legal person
that's no small throwaway word.
Yeah. Can you expand on what that, you know,
risk of legitimacy
of the final decision would actually mean to these projects?
Yeah, so, uh, I, I've made that comment off the back
of our submission where we talk about, uh,
the EPA being subjected to ministerial direction.
And I think the way we've described it in the, um,
submission is that the EPA goes from being a independent
quasi-judicial body, um,
or exercising those types of functions
to being an instrument of executive policy.
Um, and why I've said that that creates, uh, questions
of legitimacy around those decisions is
because, uh, you've removed that independence, um,
you've created an, uh, a process
where the executive is basically directing every
aspect of the decision.
And so the outcome is,
is more a political one than it is an independent body one.
And so that's where I've drawn that, um,
those two I guess, issues together.
Excellent. Well, um, any further questions?
No, uh, well thank you very much, Kura.
I really appreciate your time today.
Um, thank you very much for your submission, um,
and you have a great day.
Got it. Okay. Right. We'll move on to our next submitter.
It should be aged Care Association.
Honorable Tracy Martin,
I'm sure is well versed in how this all works.
Good. Mr. Chair. Hi. Good. How are you, Tracy?
I'm well, thank you very much. And yes,
good. I know how it works.
Yes. So welcome. You've got 10 minutes of our time.
Feel free to take submission as read and, uh, a few comments
and time for questions would be great. Far away.
Brilliant. Thank you. First of all,
thank you very much for the opportunity.
I appreciate it. Um, so as you've, um, instructed everybody,
I'm not gonna repeat our written submission,
I just wanna focus on why excluding aged care infrastructure
from the fast track regime is not just an omission,
but it's a risk to hospital flow, community resilience,
and the wellbeing of older New Zealanders.
So this bill has drafted unintentionally,
I believe sidelines a critical component
of New Zealand's health system.
Age residential care is not a nice to have social service,
it's core to health.
In health infrastructure, we operate over 40,000 beds
compared to 10,700 public hospital beds.
Every day, aged care facilities prevent avoidable hospital
admissions, and every week our beds unlock hospital wards
by enabling safe discharge.
When an aged care bed is not available, that pressure, that
pressure lands directly on the hospital system
and ultimately on the patient.
Yet the bill does not recognize aged care facilities
as eligible social infrastructure.
That absence has real consequences Without an explicit
signal, aged care proposals will sit at the back
of the queue behind more visible
or traditional infrastructure projects.
To address this, there are amendments that could be made
to the bill that we're gonna recommend to you.
Clause four, which is the interpretation
could insert into that clause.
Health and social infrastructure,
including aged care facilities and dementia care units.
Schedule two and Clause 22, section 42 A,
we could add age care infrastructure as eligible projects.
The current consenting system is preventing
capacity from being built.
So we do have members who are ready to build dementia units
and hospital level facilities and respite centers,
but they stalled.
Now, it's not for a lack of demand
and we all know that there is a funding pro problem
and we know that the government is attempting
to address the, the funding problem.
But even if they address the funding problem,
the RMA in part
and consenting processes are blocking
that capacity to build.
So they drag on for years, even when the need is urgent.
And from 2028 it's gonna become more urgent.
Fast Track could solve this if aged care was actually
included, and right now it's not.
We also think that clause 11, section 17 could be amended,
which would require the minister
to consider regional health capacity pressures
or in clause 22, section 42,
A require verified health system need to be assessed
is aged care essential infrastructure.
Well, obviously we would answer that it is,
and then if it is, it needs to be recognized in this bill.
But if it's not, then the committee must be comfortable
with escalating pressures such as overcrowded hospitals,
dementia unit closures,
and regions like left without any residential care at all.
If we inserted a new clause under 10 a requiring government
policy statements to address health
and social infrastructure needs, including aged care,
that would shift us some way forward.
Fast track decisions should also be informed
by health expertise.
Expert panels cannot make high quality decisions about aged
care projects if no member understands clinical acuity,
dementia care models, workforce constraints
and hospital integration pathways.
So we are suggesting that an amendment to Clause 56,
schedule three be made that require the inclusion
of aged care or clinical health system expertise on panels
for relevant projects
or clause 52, which would allow panels
to obtain external clinical expertise where needed.
Social infrastructure benefits are invisible
in the current criteria.
We recommend a standardized benefits template
for social infrastructure projects
to ensure verified regional demand impact on hospital flow.
Workforce feasibility and equity implications are seen.
This could be done by amending clause 45, section 81
and insert a requirement to consider those health outcomes
or clause 33, section 53, which would add to fat order
and section bodies and sector bodies as consultees
where health impacts were material
aged care reform is underway,
but infrastructure cannot wait.
The system is being redesigned,
but infrastructure needs are immediate.
The fast track process must support transitional needs.
Clause 2242 A could be amended
and add criteria enabling consideration of transit
of transitional health system pressures.
If aged care, um,
infrastructure is not explicitly included in the bill,
the fast track regime will unintentionally accelerate
everything except the projects that relieve hospital
pressure and support some of our most vulnerable citizens.
So this is a solvable problem.
One name aged care
and dementia care facilities
as eligible social infrastructure.
Two, require health aged care experts on relevant panels.
Three, use a simple social infrastructure benefits template
for enable targeted consultation
where community health impacts are significant.
These amendments would ensure
that the fast track regime accelerates the right projects,
those that generally improve wellbeing, enhance resilience
and ease hospital pressure.
Thank you Mr. Chair. That's all I have for you.
Happy to answer questions. Thanks. Thanks,
Tracy. I've, Ryan Hamilton
has a question for you.
Thanks chair, and thanks Tracy for your submission.
Makes total sense to me.
The only thing that I can't see is
or understand is what you mean by age care infrastructure.
Are you referring to buildings blocks?
Um, that's the only piece I don't understand when you say
social infrastructure beds, et cetera.
Yes. So I'm about the built environment really.
Um, an example would be if we tied at this, we are seeking,
um, an age residential care infrastructure grant fund
with one arm, um, talking to Minister Costello
and Minister Brown, um, which is similar to
what the Australian government has put in place
to grow the number of particularly standard beds
for New Zealanders who need care but don't have money.
Um, but even if we got that, that currently
because we are not in any sort of fast track process, uh,
we would be held up, um, to grow the physical number
of beds available to New Zealanders
because of the consenting process.
So, um, those two things match,
which is why I am concerned it's not, um,
it's not in this piece of legislation.
Okay. No, that's useful. Thank you.
Um, uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Thank you. Uh, so Tracy, the crux of your submission is
that age care facilities should be included,
be you want them to be able to be fast tracked.
Now, just there are some, tell me if I'm wrong,
but I think there are some age care facilities
that have been fast tracked. Is that your understanding?
I think you'll find that they're retirement villages.
Ah, so that's, is that right?
And that's, so just to be clear, just just to repeat it,
so retirement villages are a lifestyle choice.
Um, and they are independent living,
so I guess they're under the
accommodation and under housing.
This is for care facilities.
And to be honest, nobody chooses to go into a care facility.
They are assessed as requiring that level of care.
So, um, none of those have been fast tracked at the moment.
No, do do. Uh, so is it your point
that you think those, um, care facilities wouldn't meet,
wouldn't be able to be fast tracked at the moment?
Or is it that this would make it, uh, clearer
that they could be fast tracked?
Um, well at the moment, so hang on, how would I put this?
If you were just a care facility like many charities
and that are, and you don't have a village, no,
you can't be fast tracked
Because you're too small.
You're not a regional.
No. 'cause you're a care facility because you don't meet
the criteria for accommodation.
You don't meet the criteria for housing,
you are a care facility.
So it's, um, you, you standalone,
not every care facility is connected to a, uh,
retirement village or to a large corporate.
Um, most of them actually 60% are small owner operators not
for profits and charities.
So at the moment they don't have an avenue
through the consenting process.
Mm-hmm. To, to be a regional significance.
Well, to be, well it depends what you mean
by regional significance in, it's pretty significant
to the people that are just around the area of ra the fact
that they haven't got any provision.
And that would be the same for Ton.
So when you say regional significance,
I wonder whether you mean because you're not large?
Well, no, that's, that's my question to you is that, um,
the point is that fast track is to enable projects
or facilitate projects of regional significance.
So, so those are the tests that I'm asking about.
But, and your argument is
that they could well be of regional significance. Yeah,
I think there'll be a regional significance when they take
pressure off the hospitals that are in that region.
Yeah, totally not disagreeing with that. Thanks.
Oh, uh, thanks Tracy.
Um, uh, really appreciate your, um, uh, submission.
Very helpful actually to highlight an area that's
seems to been overlooked.
Um, we'll take that on board. Thank you very much.
And I'll, um, I'll now hand back over to the actual chair,
uh, Catherine has returned and, uh, thanks.
Catch today, Tracy and all, all yours, Catherine, far away.
Thank you very much.
Grant, uh, look, we will bring through our next submitter,
who is the Environment Hubs rwa,
we just saw pop up there.
Sterling, how are you? Welcome
to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read
and we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks.
Perfect Kia, everybody. Um, I'm really happy.
I'm representing as the co-chair of the board of, um,
environmental Hubs Alter Today National Network
of 22 member organizations, um, whose mission it is
to communities together to create lasting positive change
for the environment and for future generations as well.
So since 2020,
our hubs have collectively engaged more than 350,000
people through community events.
We've fed 218,000 households with rescued Kai.
We've planted more than 300,000 trees
and recorded more than 307,000 hours of volunteer time.
So together with our communities, we work resilience
and environmental tiyaga as well.
So IHA holds serious concerns about the fast track
and pro, um, that they profit over to tile
and community wellbeing.
Julie c will you, your committee
Microphone there, I'm just gonna interrupt you just
because you might wanna just move a little
closer to your computer.
Your audio is kind of just crackling up a little bit there,
just so that members can hear you precisely and well.
Oh, can you hear me now? Yes, that's better. Yep.
Oh, perfect. Thank you for that.
Um, so we sele, we urge the select committee
to center communities and policymaking
and put the environment, uh, before business interests.
And to reject the points is that, um,
the amendments don't actually address the underlying issues
that we had with the fast track approvals bill last year,
we made a submission, um, both a written
and an oral submission outlining our strong opposition
to the fast track approvals bill.
As it is, companies are currently able to bypass
Resource Management Act, the Conservation Act,
and the Wildlife Act.
These acts were specifically created to help our country
to protect its natural resources.
Bypassing these protections is a, worked
so hard to restore our natural environment
and empower communities.
We believe that this is an attempt to undo the changes
that were put in decision making power
and prioritize projects which promised financial gain over
environmental stewardship takes generations
to truly see the benefits
that our people are doing right now.
Um, you know, 300,000 trees doesn't automatically fix the
climate, but as they grow, they protect biodiversity.
They'll shelter ecosystems
and they will create resources for future generations.
What we require though, is time for
to become self-sustaining.
We don't want short term finances
to replace those natural systems.
And the degradation of our current world is, um,
because it has been over exploited for too long.
Our second point is
that the amendments override the environmental protection
set in place to ensure that our finra, uh,
thrives forever as well.
So our proposed time periods for the panel
to consider applications has been strictly cut to 60 days,
um, regardless of the complexity of scale.
Um, and that means less opportunity
for correctly scoping out the impacts of each said project
and less time to seek an expert opinion
or consult, uh, means less time to consider commentary,
which also means a narrow ability to intervene
with any harmful projects.
Um, our hubs are considered experts of their local areas.
Many of the workers within the network have seen the natural
movements of nature and people across the years.
They are absolutely the backbones of their community,
of community resilience,
and they deserve to be consulted on the changes
to community and environments.
Um, this bill feels like an opportunity
to fast track harmful projects
to get over the initial approval phase
and coupled with some of the concerning facts that, um,
major changes are allowed
after the submission sets up the possibility
of sneaking small impact, oh, sorry,
large impact projects under the guise
of smaller impact projects.
Um, our third point is
that we are concerned about the continual erosion
of the democratic process and input, um,
and the trust in our government.
Um, so worried, we're worried about the proposals, um,
that have the ability to, uh, remove the ability
for environmental organizations, hapu
and iwi, the ability to appeal
to the high court on points of law.
And as a Titi aligned organization,
we find it incredibly upsetting that the mana that we engage
with and we work alongside will be denied the right
to protect, uh, to practice meaningful partnership
and participation, um, of everyone.
They deserve the right to practice monga in their pu
and we are worried that these amendments might send,
set up the groundwork for, um, future violations of,
we're further concerned
that this New Amendment removes any requirement
for consultation with iwi and hapu
before the application process,
and instead requires only notice with an allocation
of 20 days for iwi to respond.
Um, now working alongside our manen, we know that
firsthand they are so, so busy
and stretched across all of the different projects
that they need to be across.
Um, you know, they are out in the community giving advice
to local projects, um, and to our local councils.
They, um, are safeguarding
and holding a lot of generational
knowledge of the areas as well.
Um, they create lasting impacts for the environment
and they practice kaki, tanga.
Um, but each pu each iwi, each hapu have different needs,
um, and wants that are relevant to their communities.
Uh, they deserve to be consulted on as well.
We are concerned to hear that part
of the proposal will enable applicants
to challenge suitability of panel members
and allow ministers to issue government policy statements
to outline possible benefits of a project.
Um, we think that with only 60 days to approve a project,
it would be really difficult to find someone
who could be completely authorized
to fully consider any long-term benefits
or really actually see every risk involved as well.
Um, last year we saw some
concerning trends towards weakening public trust, uh,
pushing extraordinarily unpopular bills
through with urgency.
Um, last year we saw more than 30,000 people making
submissions in a opposition
to the fast track approvals bill,
and we actually saw tens of thousands
of people protesting it in per in person as well.
Um, the message that we seem to have come back with is that
this government doesn't care to address any
of the underlying issues
of why this bill is needed in the first place.
And, um, I suppose our comment to that is just
that we are here
and our people deserve to be taken seriously
and consulted on.
It's so important as a part of our democratic process
that we have the opportunity to participate.
Um, so our fourth point is that this hides
behind an assumption that fast tracking approvals
for projects will stimulate the economy
and encourage supermarket competition.
Um, we think that that's a flimsy rationale,
but if this is the case, then why is the scope
of this bill so broad?
Um, why not narrow it down just to supermarket development?
Um, for us, it feels a bit like a way to hijack an issue
that is causing our communities a lot of pain.
Um, the cost of living and using falsification
for sweeping changes that actually have nothing
to do with the cost of living.
We know that our communities are hurting,
but we recommend that these amendments target supermarket
competition rather than painting all projects
with the same brush strokes.
So we believe that each project requires unique
consideration, um, and this amendment doesn't account for
that, not really.
Um, and our fifth point is kind of making a comment
around the, um, the timelines which have been put out
to gather consultation from the public.
Um, the timelines
for this particular bill have been quite antagonistic
towards, um, gathering any input from the community.
Um, the submissions for the bill were only open
for a single week, so seven days before it closed.
Um, and we just wanted to make the comment
that our executive officer was texted by a friend
that the consultation was open, um,
but she was texted 10 minutes before it closed.
So having 10 minutes
to throw together a single paragraph is
really stressful for her.
Um, that she saw that IHA actually had quite a high stake
in, um, what this bill proposes.
And for that I thank her deeply for her personal insight
and commitment to the copa.
Um, just by comparison,
our man local board recently opened up a consultation
earlier this year asking
for feedback on a local park management plan, um,
which was a requirement of the 1970 Sevens Reserve Act.
And that first round of consultation lasted
for an entire month.
So that was, you know, more than four weeks
of consultation period.
Um, and just for a little bit of context,
having a month meant that the team at Beautification Trust,
which is one of the hubs, a part of eh a, um, was able
to review the submission, consider the questions,
collect thoughts, write and review a shared response,
and then submit it together.
Um, just on a personal note,
I would've really appreciated more time
to discuss this verbal submission in detail with our hubs
and our managers, and encourage
that they make individual submissions and support.
Um, I think that RO would've been richer for their insights
and their personal stories, but unfortunately they were
deprived adequate time for this short consultation process.
And, um, my final thoughts are just
that Environment Hubs RO stands as advocates
for TAYO and community.
They are the two most resilient resources
that we have in Altura.
We are a group of people who work hard on the ground
to protect what matters so
that fu future generations can thrive.
And our people are story weavers,
connectors and future builders.
We are the hands in the feet of the community
and doing the important mahi,
and I'm very proud to be a part of this network.
Our final recommendation to the committee is
to please overturn this bill.
Failing that. Please re-scope the bill
to only impact supermarket competition, if
that was the intention of the bill.
And please increase requirement for Community Hapu
and Iwi consultation
and remove time limits for applications to ensure
that projects are receiving the best
possible considerations going forward.
So Environment Hubs Alter is deeply committed to the future
of Alter we has allowed for us this morning.
Kiara,
Gilda Sterling, thank you very much for that submission.
Look, you have taken your full 10 minutes
and unfortunately we don't have any further time
for questions, but, uh, we take all of that, uh, insight
and information on board.
So thank you very much for your submission today.
Um, so we are now moving on through to Hampton
Community Energy Society.
So we're just jumping forward on the agenda for anyone, um,
following
and we can see them there.
Doil, you just want
to accept the panelist prompt
to just bring you through into the
committee if you can hear us.
Oh, there we go. We can see you Doil, welcome
to the Environment Select Committee this morning.
Thank you very much. Yep,
nice, nice to have you with us.
Um, look, you've got 10 minutes with us this morning, so,
uh, we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks,
but do take your submission as read as members.
I'm sure we'll have some questions for you. So over to you.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, yeah, so I'm Douga McTavish.
I'm chair of Hamden Community Energy in North Otago near
Meraki Boulders, and I have with me
and my wife, um, who's also a member of the society.
And, uh, she'll help me answer any tricky questions you take
Over if he cos out.
Yeah. Alright. Um, uh, so our society, very briefly,
um, uh, I'm sorry I have to read this really
because it's from a group, I,
I just wanna make sure I represent it properly.
Our, um, society has been operating for two decades
in a village of about 350 people.
You can see in our mission statement, in our, um,
in our written submission,
you can see our mission statement there.
We manage Dens Waste Stream as a social enterprise.
We also operate an equipment sharing scheme.
Funds raised are turned back to the community
through a GaN scheme to other volunteer
hamden groups and services.
Our village is very typical,
a very typical rural settlement, incorporating a wide range
of beliefs, attitudes,
and interests, the focus of our submission.
Rather than repeat the excellent clause by clause analysis
of other concerned organizations such as EDS, the PCE,
Greenpeace, et cetera, we felt it would be most useful
to focus on the bill's inconsistency
with the wider global context.
We also wish to highlight that this bill together
with the Principle Act would what it would mean
for the small, uh, for small and diverse rural communities.
The context for the bill, the planetary boundaries diagram,
which is in our submission, if you, uh,
can have a look at it, um, sums up
what has been called a meta crisis.
One segment of it actually identifies New Zealand's declared
a climate emergency.
The author's state crossing boundaries increases the risk
of generating large scale aru abrupt
or irr irreversible environmental changes.
The impacts of these changes will not necessarily
be immediate or drastic,
but together the boundaries mark a critical threshold
for risks to societies
and the bias we are Part of the net impact
of exceeding these boundaries
and six of nine have been succeed exceeded, is
that our global human footprint puts us at nearly the
equivalent of two planets, a totally unsustainable,
sustainable state, the root cause being economic activity
of a scale and nature beyond the planet to assimilate.
For example, according to MIT
and our current on our current emissions trajectory
in 75 years,
our grandchildren face an average temperature increase
of at least three degrees,
ranging from 1.5 degrees in oceans to up
to 11 degrees in the North Pole.
A dangerous and unstable world, which
by then there'll be no way back from
the I ideology.
Economic growth, per se is good, is now
so universally accepted, has become common sense.
It is, of course, the central
rallying call of this government.
Under such circumstances, it's hard for us
to imagine alternatives.
At the very least, we simply must ensure
that new developments do not aggravate the situation
and preferably reverse it.
That requires distinguishing between useful
and harmful growth,
which demands robust profe process founded in evidence.
For example, in a world requiring radically reduced
emissions in facing, uh, energy
and critical materials constraint.
The relevance of large scale infrastructure projects such
as motorways and airports needs thorough
and objective examination.
National level policy response
to the mega crisis meta crisis.
Our written submission contains, uh, not exhausted list
of policies that work against such a process.
Based on the growth as good ethos, the combination simply
reinforces the excessive powers already granted
to, uh, in the principle act.
The net effect is to increase the risk
of making serious mistakes in both the kinds of development
and how they're implemented.
Failure could prove both costly
and environmentally damaging.
Part of that is due to the interface, uh, interference
in due process, but possibly more importantly,
it effectively prevents the public from participating in
development decision making, both nationally
and in their own backyards,
local level policy responses to the meta crisis.
Years ago, our community ran a series of public information
workshops with qualified experts that filled the local hall.
This led to the formation of our society
and ongoing efforts to try
and ensure the development
of our district was unsustainable, was sustainable.
Sorry. Please.
Uh, since then, members of our society have been active
in policy development at all levels,
including the national policy statement
of freshwater management, the regional policy statement
of Otago Regional Water Plans, the acki, uh,
long-term plan and district plan.
Some have also participated in ROS Con resource consent
application for specific projects where they may find
they are the only ones speaking for social
and environmental factors, which are later found
to be an important part of the decision.
Examples include Project AQUA
and the North Bank Tunnel Hydro
proposals on the Lower WA TKI River, huge public
participation extended deliberations, given the time
and requirement for extra scrutiny,
eventually the ecological
and geological impacts were found to be too risky
and the applications were voluntarily withdrawn.
Local body roll under the bill. We find it absurd.
This bill expects small local communities to effectively,
sorry, councils, councils, small local councils.
What did I say? Let me, ah, small local councils, uh,
uh, to effectively take the place of direct participation
for interested residents from a logistical point of view,
and not withstanding uncertainty over funding,
but timeframes to consult
and understand what the community wishes,
and then to arrange the necessary expert input
to prepare the case appears to us to be totally unrealistic.
Moreover, wacky is a highly diverse community extending from
tourism and farming communities in the McKenzie country,
dairy farmers and immigrants on the irrigated plains,
fishermen, businessmen, environmental,
and Victoria heritage enthusiasts at the coast.
Expecting one council
to honestly reflect all these interest groups in a fast
track application is simply ful nearly there
with fast track legislation, local
and regional decision making for district
and regional plans in which we regularly participate
could be overridden by a policy statement.
Predetermining, what constitutes projects of regional
and national importance
and made without reference to what the residents
of this area hold dear.
So summing up first, both the objectives of this bill
and the manner in which it is being rushed through
tilt the odds in fa favor of certain outcomes.
We find this deeply troubling
and it feels manipulate, manipulative,
and it undermines trust in government
and it does not feel kiwi.
It bypasses.
Secondly, it bypasses policies
and plans developed under the principle
of sustainable management in full consultation
for communities over decades who have a right
to feel cheated with this bill.
Third, we object in the strongest possible terms
to being excluded from directly participating in development
proposals that could affect the safety
and wellbeing of our children.
Given we all have them, one would expect politicians
of all persuasions to fully support that.
In short, the policy processes must be both inclusive
and must allow objective
and thorough assessment of all information relevant to
wellbeing outcomes, including the global imperatives
as, as most of, as most of its provisions
against such process.
We asked the select committee, uh,
to recommend its withdrawal.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Doled.
We've just got one quick question we'll have time
for from LA Farm who's just popped up her hand.
Doled, thank you so much for your submission
and your ongoing community advocacy for so long.
My question was, um, you, you sort
of talked a lot about the bigger picture
and you actually seem, uh, you're coming across
as quite exasperated at the severity of these changes.
How would you describe if this bill is to go through
how you and the Hampton community, uh,
would feel about your government pushing this bill through?
Uh, do you wanna answer that?
Well, we actually think that our village
is a tiny microcosm of the whole country
and we've found that in the past it's been better to try
and bring people along with us
rather than ram things down their throats.
Because if people don't feel that they have been consulted,
um, they have a grievance which has then becomes fastened to
any little, um, any little problem
or something that rubs them the wrong way.
And you soon get a real backlash against
what you're trying to do.
And if people don't participate, that thing falls over.
So we are a great believer in, in
and getting all the information out on the table to start
with and getting anybody who's interested to
put forward what they think and then we either go ahead
or we don't go ahead.
And that seems to me to be a fairly good recipe for
national government as well.
Thank you very much, Doug Gild, uh,
and you both there for your submission today
and for representing your group.
We appreciate your time
and we have met time, so, uh,
we hope you both have a good day. Mm,
Thank you. Thank you
for the opportunity.
All the best for your decisions.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
So we now move on to Kit Withers, um,
who should be online and we should see pop up there soon.
Thanks for uh, hearing me.
Oh, hi kit.
Look, you've got five minutes with us
so we'll hand it straight over to you to open up.
Thank you. Let me expand on a few points in my submission
0.1, experts are not being listened to.
The Pike River Health
and Safety Manager was completely
ignored in the push for profit.
Example two, the thorough report on managed retreat
and climate mitigation by a panel
of experts under Professor Jonathan Boston has been
completely ignored by this government.
Instead, the government tells us when the next cyclone
Gabriel Hill destroys Gabriel Hill destroys your home
or farm, you're on your own baby.
The current government plan will see increasing
low land area of RT R destroyed as they become uninsurable.
Climate experts tell us these mega storms which cost us
billions are only going to ramp up.
We have two of the top climate experts in the world.
One is the just retired climate commissioner,
professor James Renick.
The other is Dr. Kevin Trend birth
with nearly 600 publications.
They both served on the World Climate Research Program
of the International Panel on Climate Change
and he spells it out
and something called how not
to solve the climate change problem.
We need to build resilience to weather extremes.
The science tells us
of millions dying each year from air pollution.
The other day on the terrace, I was stuck behind a bus
belching black smoke that damages lungs,
the administer Chris Bishop as low the emission standards
for secondhand car imports to make polluting gas,
gas cheaper and electrical hybrid cars dearer.
Example three. This government's going to
gut the Climate Change Response Act
and the climate Change commissions main functions.
I find this really disheartening with we know
that every 10th of a degree
can reduce the global temperature, will save millions
of lives that increasing millions will have
to immigrate or die.
Putting billions of taxpayer dollars into new defense toys
is not the way to go.
When David Seymour was on the campaign trail talking in ri I
asked him about emotions.
He says, talking about greenhouse emotions now,
he said our contribution was too small
to be worth acting on it.
Just leave it to the big voice.
We take responsibility for our emissions.
Point two, nearly finished.
This government has ruthlessly ripped
through environmental protection
and basic social service in the mad pursuit
of endless growth on a finite planet.
They know we need transparent,
inclusive progress on finance, mitigation and adaptation.
People are really worried about who will be on this panel
of unelected people.
Corporations seem to be running the government
with no concern for public safety
or the quality of most people's lives.
The Prime Minister has a repugnant view of the natural world
as a portfolio of assets to be shuffled
and exploited our national parks so legacies
for future generations.
It's a very short term view to exploit their minerals,
the coal and the conservation area.
The dentist and plateau has the potential
to double our greenhouse gas emissions.
That's huge. Our real wealth must lie in protecting our
unique ecosystems.
Finally, briefly leading applicants object
to panel members as a blatant conflict of interest.
Decisions about our environment must be made
by independent witnesses.
Experts, panels must be independent, not shaped
to suit corporate interest.
Thank you for listening.
Happy to submit this to you if you want
to see this extra points.
Oh, thank you very much Kit.
I'm sure that would be useful
and members would appreciate that.
Uh, look, we have met, uh, the five minutes so uh,
we will move on.
But thank you very much for your time today.
We appreciate you coming on the
select committee this afternoon.
Thank you. Thanks, bye now.
So we now move through to our next submitter. Why Kato Nui
Scheduled for 1215.
Oh welcome, una to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so uh, take your submission
as read, but I'm sure members will have questions.
So we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks.
Thank you
Koto, for the opportunity to present
our oral submission today.
Uh, we're currently just waiting to be joined by council.
Um, but we'll, we'll get into the beginning part of it
and hopefully they join in time.
So, um, I'm
joined by my colleagues PU as well as Natasha Gava
and Rebecca Rito.
So this submission is presented on behalf of tega
or Waikato Incorporated Waikato tno, the representative body
of 33 Hapu 68 Rae of Waikato and over 98,000 tribal members.
Um, Waikato Tno strongly opposes the bill in its current
form as it poses a significant threat to the status
of our well established TU settlement of 1995 as well
as our river river settlement.
In 2010, um, Waikato Nui entered into Adida settlement
with the crown regarding our Waikato River claim under
TGI in 2008.
This was followed by the resigning of a revised deed in 2009
and ultimately enacted, um, enacted
by the River Settlement Act.
So the bill in its current form overlooks the nuances
and principles of our settlements
and our settlement legislation, which provides
for co-management, co-governance,
meaningful engagement and consultation.
This bill also displaces our established arrangements
and risks and consistency with
Tuana are joint management agreements
and other settlement mechanisms.
Um, the River Settlement Act 2010 created a bespoke
agreement which was premised on an integrated framework
of co-management with Ana AWA
and Tuana at the heart of this framework.
So as some of you may know, Tuana is the vision
and strategy for the Waikato River
and is the primary direction setting document
for the Waikato River setting.
A standard of care that has an intention to protect,
restore, and enhance our au for current
and future generations.
Um, guiding all activities within the Waikato
and Wapa River catchments,
it takes precedence over other subordinate LE legislation,
NPS and other planning documents.
The health of our AWA is interconnected
with the health of our people.
Therefore, the standard is high
and is vital to ensure continued protection
and sustainable development.
So in line with our settlement
and corresponding legislation by Kanoi along
with other river iwi must be engaged, consulted, and
provided with adequate opportunity for comment prior
to any planning consenting
or development with the naro Here,
we'll not accept anything less.
Um, and this is a benchmark that we would like
to be cemented going forward.
Um, I was gonna pass on now to my colleagues,
but they haven't yet joined Kia.
Can you hear me? Ah,
Kiara. So I'll
pass on now to Rebecca Reto and Natasha Gavan
and they'll address the more technical
parts of our submission.
Kiara, thank you for the opportunity to speak on the bill.
I appear for and their position is clear.
They strongly oppose the bill as drafted
because it threatens the status of their settlements,
undermines UA
and severely limits iwi
and Hapu participation in the resource management system.
Speaking from the perspective of the hour 33 Hapu 68 midday
and more than 98,000 registered trial members,
I'll address three points.
Firstly, the bill's failure to uphold the river settlement
and ang obligations.
Secondly, the weakening of safeguards
that protect treaty settlements and recognize rights.
And finally, the erosion of balanced constitutional roles.
So to the first point, the failure
to uphold the river settlement and obligations.
The W Castle River settlement is a binding legal commitment
between the Crown and W Castle twi.
It ushered in a new era of co-governance
and co-management with Ana
as the primary direction setting document for the hour
and activities affecting it.
W's ability to exercise their
over their hour depends in practice on three things.
Firstly, the continuation of the primacy of TE 35.
Secondly, the shape of government legislation and policy.
And finally, funding this bill materially weakens two
of those three pillars.
It introduces government policy statements to frame
what counts as regional and national benefits,
and then requires decision makers
to consider those statements.
There is no requirement to consult iwi
or hapu on those government on the drafting
of those government policy statements.
This invites policy instruments that could conflict with ANA
and treaty settlements, displacing Titi based
and environmental obligations
with centrally defined political priorities.
It also narrows the grounds on which panels might decline
approvals by requiring panels
to balance effects against those centrally defined benefits.
Secondly, the bill demotes engagement with iwi hapu
and treaty settlement entities from consultation to me,
notification at key pre lodgement stages even
where joint management agreements
or memoranda of understanding exist
that reverses hard one progress in treaty partnership
practice and weakens co-governance in
the bill also shortens a response timeframes
and critical places.
For example, 15 to work from 20 to 15 working days
for comments that change disproportionately prejudices, iwi
and hapu who must coordinate across multiple entities
engaged with other technical experts
and consult against the, in short, the primacy
of TE 35 manner is placed at risk.
Iwi and hapu are sideline from influencing policy in
legislative settings that directly affect their tile
and compressed processes will inevitably diminish the
quality of decisions.
To our second point, the weak of safeguards
that protect treaty settlements
and recognized customary rights.
The bill removes mandatory review
of treaty settlement implications by Maori ministers
and substitutes, general departmental consultation
that we can safeguard specifically designed
to prevent infringement of treaty settlements
and recognized customer rights.
At a minimum that safeguard should be retained
and we submit it should be further strengthened
by requiring relevant draft reports to be
provided to affected iwi
and Hapu with a duty to genuinely consider
and incorporate feedback.
Further, the bill's panel appointment provisions allow
applicants and local authorities
to raise concerns about prospective panel members,
but exclude iwi
and hapu from that process for decisions
that will affect their title.
Thus exclusion undermines co-governance confidence in the
process and the legitimacy of outcomes.
To a third point, the erosion
of balanced constitutional roles.
The bill expands executive powers in ways
that cut across constitutional balance.
Key concerns include centralized priority setting
with the introduction of the minister's government policy
statements scope shift by the executive
as the minister can effectively amend primary legislation
that being scheduled to without the corresponding
environmental or treaty scrutiny.
And finally, the executive's supervision of the EPA.
All of this operates in an environment
where Titi based safeguards are reduced.
Iwi and hapu are not at the table when key rules are set
and timelines are compressed in ways
that diminish participation and careful decision making.
To conclude the government views, speed of deliveries,
the key benefit, but
for the long-term consequences will ultimately have the
greatest effect therefore, for these reasons
and those set out in our written submissions.
W Castle TWI opposes the bill as drafted.
It concentrates decision making power in the executive
narrows, independent and community of formed assessment
and sidelines, iwi and hapu participation.
That concludes a brief summary of the wika submissions.
Thank you for your time and we're happy
to answer any part time.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Look, we've got a question from La Farm
Koto. Thank you so much
all for your submission today.
Um, you've used the strong word, uh, about legitimacy
and the changes proposed in this bill, meaning that
that is questioned in terms of the decisions
that are made in the projects
and we heard the same from, uh,
the Maori Law Society earlier today.
What would be the implications for, uh, the iwi
and Hapu of w Katoi?
Um, if you essentially have IEG legitimate decisions
and projects then going through in,
can you help us understand what that might mean for you?
Well, without Iwi
and Hapu participation, genuine participation
and the process of, um, the fast rate process itself, um,
they're not able to influence any of the decisions
or any of the outcomes, especially in
that key pre lodgement phase.
And to be able to have ii hapu
and those treaty settlements on board with any
of the decision makings, um, allows them
to be engaged in the process
but also allows them to be kaki of their tile.
Um, the people that will, you know, look
after the environment and, um, be part of the process.
Thank you. Look, we've got time
for one last question from Celia Wade Brown.
Celia appears to no longer have a question. I
Found it, I found the unmute, unmute button.
Thank you for your time, Catherine.
Um, Koto, thank you.
I had a question about the timing.
Um, as a very large
and influential group with a, um, that was amazing,
the 33 hapu
and 68 marai, do you feel that your input was respected
by only having, um, either 10
or 11 days to prepare a submission on this bill?
Karina Karina, did you wanna answer that question?
Yeah, no, absolutely not.
And that's kind of one of the hugest problems
that we are seeing with a lot of these reforms coming
through is that there is an adequate time to respond
and, um, consequentially like we are not having
adequate time to consult with our marai whanau either.
So putting together a response in such a short timeframe
isn't adequate for such huge changes. Um, yeah,
Thank you.
Thank you very much to you all for your submission today.
We've made time, but we appreciate you coming on board a
little earlier than scheduled as well.
So thank you very much for your insights today.
So we will now move through
to our final submitter in this session.
Uh, Andrew Del who I can see online there.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon, Andrew.
Alright, You have five minutes with us,
so we will hand straight over to you to, uh,
put forth your submission. Thank you.
Okay. So, um, I suppose one of the fundamental points
is that the speed
of good decision making depends on the specific
circumstances on an application, how complex
or simple it is.
Um, these, these are, these, this amendment
or these amendments are reinforcing a system which builds on
a sign insignificant potential for poor decisions
and corrupt practices.
Based on my 30 plus years in resource management, I suggest
that some of the essentials on good cons,
good consenting practice are recognizing
that we're often dealing with resources held in common, um,
ensuring that information is complete and un understood
and what the likely effects are.
And I would say relying on an applicant's my experience,
relying on the information
provided by an applicant is very often inadequate.
Um, decisions should be consistent with the purpose
of the legislation under which the deci un
under which the consent is, is is granted.
Um, being considered and with to treaty.
Um, public input is often important for, uh,
rounding out and completing the information on the
environment and proposal effects and on improving proposals.
Um, in part
because resources
that held in common are often being considered as well.
Um, there needs to be an ability to review decisions,
not a curtailment of appeal rights
and specifically, particularly bad proposals in this,
in this amendment bill are excluding public consultation
prior to issuing of any government policy statement.
Um, unlike a number of the, the process for a number
of other government policy statements,
which do include public consultation
and drafts, um, definitions.
And, um, and, and one of the concerns with that is that the,
um, policy statements will be including,
um, guidance and influence on what is regionally
or national benefit or significance.
The importance of regional
and national significance is fundamental to the, to this law
and should be in the legislation not changed at the women
political interests of the on, on,
on the day of the Ministers.
Uh, more opportunity is needed
for third party public input, not less.
The more public input you get in my experience in
applications, the better the result is.
Um, being able to modify applications,
um, following the first few steps in the process.
Um, it needs to be subject to some sort
of constraint about not expanding scope or
otherwise it becomes a Trojan horse within the Trojan horse
that is this legislation.
Um, and applicant's commenting on Nash hearing panel
membership is a is is not
as fun fundamentally at odds with the, with the process
of having an independent hearing panel.
Um, finally I'd just say that the, um, the rush process,
the attempt to disguise significant, um, changes
by calling it, by describing it as something
for supermarkets is just playing very bad.
Uh, law ma authoritarian law making
fast track consenting does not imply that you need
to also have fast track logis legislation to set it up.
Thank you. Thank you Andrew, for your submission.
Pre Anker has the first question for you,
Andrew. Thank you for
your very clear
and very strong, um, submission.
Um, I had a question on the, the point
that you've made in your written submission
and in your verbal submission today, um, around the GPS
and the, uh, potential for that to then expand the scope
of what is being considered, uh,
and the fact that it's problematic,
that it's not defined in the legislation alone.
Is your worry there then that, um, uh,
a minister could just define it, for example,
to bring in mining projects From your experience in your
reading of this legislation, is that something
that could occur as a result of this bill?
It certainly could occur and,
and I think my concern is that there's no draft
to comment on, to start with.
There's no provision for a draft and for public comment.
So it just comes out of the air
and, um, the flaws of if any,
do not get a chance to be pointed out.
Great. Thank you. Thank,
Thank you. And just one
last quick question from Lan Farm
Qua. Thank you so much
for today, Andrew.
Um, I note that you say in your submission
that you've got over 30 years as an RM planner and advisor,
and you go on to use really strong language about this bill
being a device to smuggle overly authoritarian amendments
into what is already a draconian
and corrupting piece of legislation.
Have you ever used such language
or come across such legislation
as this in your time as a planner?
Um, no.
I start, I started under the Town and Country Planning Act,
but after the National Development Act had had been in God,
um, the language, oh,
well it was also my submission on the original Fast Track
bill, which has similar language.
Thank you very much Andrew.
We appreciate your submission today.
We will have to leave it there. We have met time.
Uh, you have a good day. Yep.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, look, members
and those following, we are now going to break until 1:00 PM
Uh, so thank you for everyone's time this morning
and we'll see you all at one.